The following is a conversation with
 
Irving Finkele who is a scholar of
 
ancient languages curator at the British
 
Museum for over 45 years and is a much
 
admired and respected world expert on
 
kuneaoiform script and more generally on
 
ancient languages of Samrian, Acadian
 
and Babylonian and also on ancient board
 
games and uh Mesopotamian magic,
 
medicine, literature and culture.
 
I should also mention that both on and
 
off the mic, Irving was a super kind and
 
fun person to talk to with an infectious
 
enthusiasm for ancient history that of
 
course I already love but uh fell in
 
love with even more. This is the Lex
 
Freedman podcast. To support it, please
 
check out our sponsors in the
 
description where you can also find
 
links to contact me, ask questions, get
 
feedback, and so on. And now, dear
 
friends, here's Irving Thinkle.
 
Where and when did writing originate in
 
human civilization? Let's go back a few
 
thousand years.
 
&gt;&gt; The first attempts at writing that we
 
could call writing go back to the middle
 
of the fourth millennium say around 3500
 
BC something like that. There were
 
people in the Middle East, individuals
 
who lived between the Euphrates and
 
Tigris rivers who had clay as their
 
operating material for building and all
 
sorts of other purposes. And eventually
 
as a writing support, they somehow
 
developed the idea of the basis of
 
writing which means that you can make a
 
sign which people agree on on a surface
 
that another person when they see it,
 
they know what sound it engenders. That
 
is the essence of writing that there's
 
an agreed system of symbols that A can
 
use and B can then play back either in
 
their heads or literally with their
 
voice is a bit like a gramophone record.
 
So when it really began is a terribly
 
terribly awkward question for us because
 
the truth of the matter is we have no
 
idea when anything began and all we can
 
say is that the oldest evidence we have
 
is around 3,500 BC. But whether that was
 
anywhere near the time or the stage when
 
this started off for for the first time
 
seems to me very very unlikely.
 
So in among these the Mesopotamians
 
around 3,500 they started to do this.
 
They made up signs which everybody
 
understood and they could write simple
 
pictographic messages. Foot is a foot, a
 
leg is a leg and barley is barley. And
 
then very very gradually they had the
 
idea of how you could represent
 
numerals. And then they had the idea
 
that the pictures could also represent
 
signs. And once they had the idea that
 
you could write sounds with pictures,
 
that's the crucial thing that a picture
 
of a foot not only meant foot, but it
 
meant the sound of the word for foot.
 
Once this happened,
 
some probably very very imaginative and
 
clever persons had a kind of light bulb
 
moment when they realized that they
 
could develop a whole paniply of signs
 
which could convey sound. And once you
 
had that, you're liberated from
 
pictographic writing into a position
 
where you can record language. So
 
language, grammar, and all the rest of
 
it. before long proverbs and literature
 
and all the other things that got
 
written down. So it was a pretty
 
gigantic step whenever it was taken but
 
we really have no idea when it was first
 
taken but the first evidence we have
 
presents a sort of clearish sort of
 
picture. It was simple and it got more
 
complicated and then it became
 
magnificent so that with all the signs a
 
fluent and well-trained scribe could not
 
only write down the Sumerian language
 
which was one of the native tongues of
 
Iraq and or the Babylonian language
 
which was one the other main language of
 
Iraq but also any other language he
 
heard. So if somebody came speaking
 
French ahead of their time and spoke out
 
loud, he could record with these signs
 
the sound of French. And we have
 
examples of funny languages in the world
 
around in the Bronze Age which were
 
written in Q&amp;A form purely by ear. And
 
often sometimes the scribes who recorded
 
by dictation or by something wrote stuff
 
they couldn't understand but somebody
 
else could read and understand it. So
 
what you have is long before the
 
alphabet when the alphabet was not even
 
a dream um complex bewildering looking
 
off-putting writing system which was
 
actually very beautiful flexible and
 
lasted for well over 3 millennia
 
probably closer to four millennia and it
 
took a long time for the alphabet which
 
anybody would say was much much more
 
useful and much more sensible to
 
displace it. So, it's one of the major
 
stages of man's intellect because quite
 
soon after the writing first took off,
 
the signs began to proliferate and
 
someone said, "Hey, we haven't got a
 
sign for this sound or we haven't got a
 
sign for this idea." And so it began to
 
swell out and at some extremely
 
remarkable stage, one probably only one
 
person suddenly realized that if there
 
was no control um they would grow
 
exponentially and exponentially until it
 
was all nonsense and everybody had their
 
own writing. And the second thing is
 
that no one could remember them unless
 
they were written down in a retrievable
 
way. So they invented not only writing
 
they invented lexography
 
which means that early in the third
 
millennium they put down all the things
 
that were made of wood and all the
 
things that were made of reads and all
 
the names of colors and of countries and
 
all the gods and everything. They made a
 
systematic attempt to make these signs
 
um to standardize them and to make them
 
retrievable and of course to teach them.
 
And having exercised that rigor from the
 
outset, it meant that the thing became
 
streamlined and stayed more or less as
 
it was all the way through for three
 
millennia or more because the stamp put
 
on it by those early visionaries not
 
only who um came up with the system and
 
how it would work but to preserve it and
 
to safeguard it was fantastically
 
effective. So it means that there were
 
scholars in Babylon in the 3rd century
 
or the second century when Alexander was
 
there for example. If somebody dug up a
 
tablet in very early writing, they would
 
have a pretty good idea what it meant.
 
They would recognize the signs even
 
though they were so ancient and they'd
 
see the relationships between them. So
 
you have a fantastically
 
strong
 
system where the spinal cord was
 
structured in a lexographic regular
 
system. So lexography and what the signs
 
were was jealously safeguarded and
 
protected and it lasted fantastically.
 
&gt;&gt; We should say that the name of that
 
system that lasted for 3,000 years is
 
Kunea form.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So in the 19th century about 1840
 
1850 they started to find these things
 
on excavations in Iraq the big Assyrian
 
cities and sometimes further south the
 
Babylonian cities. They found these clay
 
tablets which in the ground lasted
 
unimaginable lengths of time and they
 
were all written in what we call
 
kuneaoiform script. And the kuneaoiform
 
part of it means wedge shaped because
 
kunea in Latin means wedge. And when
 
they first saw these signs they realized
 
that a cluster of marks broke down into
 
um different arrangements of triangular
 
shapes. And it's most clear on the
 
Syrian reliefs where the writing is very
 
big and you can easily tell that they
 
were that shape. On a tablet the wedge
 
is not quite so predominant. So that was
 
it. So they first called them cuniatic
 
or cuneaoiform and the word stuck. And
 
of course growing up in the British
 
Museum and reading these things for a
 
living becomes a kind of
 
lifetime's work to make sure that
 
everybody in the country knows what kuna
 
means cuz once in a while you meet
 
somebody who never heard of the word at
 
all and this is appalling. So people do
 
survive however but it's an important
 
mission because it's such an achievement
 
by man and so much knowledge was
 
encapsulated in these lumps of clay
 
because they used it for everyday things
 
like letters and business documents and
 
contracts. This is one thing and then
 
the kings wrote
 
long elaborate accounts of their
 
campaigns and their military activities.
 
And then there was proper literature,
 
bell, le and magic and medicine and
 
all other genre of literature that we
 
would naturally list on a sheet of paper
 
in alphabetic writing what you would use
 
writing for. They basically did and it
 
had the unexpected quality that most of
 
these clay things lasted in the ground
 
until now. So, however many hundreds of
 
thousands of tablets are in the world's
 
museums and collections, there must be
 
millions of them in the ground awaiting
 
excavation. So, um in a way that's a
 
comforting thought cuz they're safe
 
there and protected.
 
&gt;&gt; You said that the development of
 
kuneaform of these tablets of written
 
language is one of the greatest probably
 
the greatest invention in human history.
 
How hard do you think it was to come up
 
with this? And we should make clear that
 
that very specific element of encoding
 
sound
 
on the tablet. That's the genius
 
invention. Drawing a picture makes
 
sense. Okay. Here's, you know, barley,
 
here's the sun, here's whatever the
 
actual object.
 
&gt;&gt; Exactly.
 
&gt;&gt; But to actually write down sound
 
&gt;&gt; is a genius invention. Well, I think
 
it's rather paradoxical
 
because the first generation or so of
 
tablets that we have are written in
 
these pictographic signs where each sign
 
means what it looks like. So, this is a
 
very limited method of recording
 
messages and it doesn't lend itself to
 
recording grammar. And then the
 
secondary phase as we understand it from
 
archaeology is the perception that you
 
could take these signs still meaning
 
what they look like but also what the
 
word sounded like. So then you have all
 
these wonderful ice cubes which express
 
all the sounds of the language from
 
which you can record words and and
 
grammar and everything else. Now the
 
thing is the received law from a
 
seriology is it was that way round that
 
first we had pictures and secondly we
 
had sound. Well, I have to say I find
 
this very hard to believe because if you
 
had a group of people in an environment
 
where it was compellingly necessary to
 
make a system that you made marks on a
 
surface which everybody could understand
 
and use. Why wouldn't you start out with
 
signs that made sounds? Because
 
everybody speaks the same language,
 
right? So you we they didn't have a b
 
cde e fg but they could easily work out
 
all the vowels and consonants without
 
naming them as vowels and consonants but
 
the component parts. So they could have
 
had signs that started out because if
 
you decided you had we have 26 let's say
 
they had 50 signs that would create the
 
sound they could write anything without
 
any further trouble. So I find it very
 
bewildering that they started off with
 
the least flexible and the least
 
adaptable system of pictographs and then
 
they moved on to the sound. I don't know
 
why they bothered with it. And my hunch
 
is that the archeological evidence that
 
we have on this score is ultimately
 
misleading because I think this that
 
probably for a very very long time
 
before the Sumerianss, people in the
 
world, the world of what we call the
 
Middle East were in contact. They
 
traded. They probably even had wars and
 
they had messages between them. And I
 
think there was a longunning system of
 
communication between people who didn't
 
share a language
 
for whom pictures would suffice. So if
 
merchants come and they have three sheep
 
to sell, so they draw three little
 
sheep, you know how much it is and what
 
they are and so forth. And and so I
 
think that what happened with the
 
Sumerianss with their pictographic signs
 
is that those signs are right at the end
 
of a very very very long period of time
 
when somebody thought what we can do is
 
take these stupid inhibited no smoking
 
signs and write language. That is what I
 
think happened. That's what I think
 
happened.
 
&gt;&gt; Is this a controversial statement?
 
&gt;&gt; Highly controversial. Highly contro.
 
Many many athereologists would leave the
 
room.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; But I'm not scared of controversy
 
because it's natural. I if you think
 
about it, it's natural because
 
you don't have to have an alphabet to
 
divide your word into sounds. See, for
 
example, in Sumerian,
 
you have a funny system of R. You have a
 
root like do, which means to go, and
 
then you have prefixes like e or moo or
 
ba. and they one's a passive, one's an
 
active and this and this. So when you
 
have a sentence, you have one of the
 
moob bar or e prefixes. Then you have
 
the root and then you have things at the
 
end. So it's called a glutinative by
 
people who like to make things look more
 
important than they are. So you have the
 
central thing. You slap stuff on the
 
beginning, slap stuff on the end, and
 
each particle creates a bit of meaning.
 
So you have a long verb which tells you
 
he would have done it if he could, but
 
he couldn't kind of thing in in the form
 
of the verb. But the thing is, if you
 
wanted to write down, you and I decided
 
to write the answer, the first thing we
 
would do is have a sign moo and then
 
we'd have bar and then we'd have e
 
because every 5 minutes people make
 
those noises.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; You see what I mean?
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah, absolutely. Do you think it's
 
possible we might find
 
much much older?
 
&gt;&gt; I do.
 
&gt;&gt; Kuneaform type tablets
 
&gt;&gt; well or pictographic type tablets before
 
the kunea form when they're drawing
 
type. And I'll tell you why. Because
 
there's this marvelous site in Turkey
 
called Gobeclete. You know about GBC?
 
Well, everybody knows about the
 
buildings and the architecture and the
 
skull. Everybody knows about it. If you
 
go all the way through the photographs,
 
which the archaeologists unwisely put
 
online, you'll find in the middle of one
 
color plate with lots of other things, a
 
round green stone like a scarab from
 
Egypt. That's to say it has an arched
 
back and a flat bottom. And on the flat
 
bottom there are hieroglyphic signs
 
carved in the stone. Right? No one said
 
anything about it at all. But it's clear
 
to me a that this was a stamp to ratify
 
where the the carvings of the signs on
 
clay or some other ceiling material
 
would leave an impression. It must be
 
that. So this is about 9,000 BC.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Now when I was a boy at
 
university, my professor said to me that
 
the reason you can writing evolved in
 
Mesopotamia because they had complex
 
cities with ziggurats and big buildings
 
and lots of people and they had to
 
organize everything and so they invented
 
writing to cope with it. Well, if they
 
had to cope with that in Sumer in 3000
 
BC, they sure as hell had to do it at
 
Geekbecepe because they hardly even
 
begun to finish excavating the sites of
 
Geekly. go on and on like Manchester and
 
Newcastle United. And really um the old
 
rule would be you could not have
 
architecture like that that without that
 
planned and built according to principle
 
with all the different people. You
 
couldn't have that without writing in
 
southern Iraq. So how come suddenly
 
7,000 years earlier they do it there?
 
That and that green stone shows that
 
they had writing. That was an official
 
who sealed this, got the stuff or
 
whatever it was or was his dad's name or
 
whatever it is. Got a wiggly snake and a
 
wiggly this. That is pictographic
 
writing. Maybe even as phonetic. I don't
 
know. But it was writing thousands of
 
years before in the south. And that's
 
what I think it is. You know, people
 
came with metal from or or precious
 
stones from Anatolia. They knew that in
 
the south they had lots and lots of
 
stuff. They wanted to trade. They had to
 
communicate. And it's basically like
 
having a cigarette with an X through the
 
middle. Everybody in the world knows
 
what that means. That they don't know
 
what the word for cigarette is in this
 
language or cancer or filter or tobacco.
 
It doesn't matter. It's that's
 
pictographic writing. We still use it
 
and and it's it's above all kinds of
 
mess. And I think that was the
 
prevailing system because I honestly
 
believe that the people at this time
 
were not stupid. They weren't gorillas.
 
They weren't less advanced than we are.
 
They were probably indistinguishable
 
from what we are. So you have merchants
 
and wanderers and people who see let's
 
go down the river and see where we end
 
up and and people looking for money,
 
looking for women, looking for
 
everything. I mean that's surely how it
 
was. But if you look at those Geckley
 
buildings with a skeptical eye how it
 
could be. I mean the finish of it is
 
astonishing. The structure of it, the
 
vision of it. to the workforce and the
 
tools and the organization,
 
you know, what do they do it with a
 
megaphone, your breakfast and all that
 
kind of thing? No way. No way.
 
&gt;&gt; So that's a really controversial
 
statement.
 
&gt;&gt; At the time of Gobelepe, they may have
 
been already a writing system.
 
&gt;&gt; There was because the thing is about it
 
that it's it's a seal to ratify. It's
 
not just a squiggle on a pot and you can
 
say, "Oh, that's just a piece of debt."
 
This is a finished thing with a flat
 
surface. You press it down. say you have
 
some contract, you have some building
 
arrangement, some we paying for these
 
bricks, whatever it was and the official
 
person had to squash it down and it
 
leaves the impression I mean I am a
 
great believer in Sherlock Holmes
 
&gt;&gt; as a teaching system for intelligence
 
and rationality and logic and thinking.
 
I read those stories a million times
 
when I was a kid. And the thing about
 
about them, one of the things which
 
impressed me most of all was this point
 
quoted by Holmes, not original to him,
 
that it is theoretically possible to
 
infer the Niagara Falls from a raindrop.
 
&gt;&gt; That's a powerful statement.
 
&gt;&gt; It's a powerful statement. Well, that
 
seal from Geekly Tee is a raindrop from
 
which I infer writing. And it's
 
perfectly possible they all wrote on
 
flat leaves. After all, in many parts of
 
the world, that's what happens. So for
 
example, in the Indis Valley, people
 
write the most abject nonsense about the
 
Indis Valley writing system. But all we
 
have is seals basically. So they are
 
also for ratification purposes and they
 
have the name of the owner in three or
 
four or maybe five signs and it's
 
probably me son of my dad or milkman or
 
whatever it is. And it's obvious. It's
 
obvious that they had writing on a
 
perishable material. They can't just
 
have had inscribed stone seals and many
 
parts of India today write on palm leaf.
 
Why should it be any different? So
 
people think you know well just cuz it's
 
now it wouldn't be then. But actually
 
that argument is utterly utterly facious
 
because the process of evolution is
 
stymied left right and center by
 
inertia. inertia is nearly as strong as
 
evolution. And this is something that
 
the people who talk about progress and
 
ideas have no idea about. First of all,
 
your whole line of work you're making me
 
realize is a kind of like Sherlock
 
Holmes type of process. The deciphering
 
of the language archaeology of taking
 
those pieces of evidence and trying to
 
reconstruct a vision of that world. And
 
now you're making me realize
 
that even all the kuneaform tablets we
 
have is just a raindrop
 
compared to the waterfall of of
 
thousands of years of humans.
 
&gt;&gt; We have a lot but it's nothing in
 
comparison what existed. But not only
 
that, see we don't have to decipher
 
anymore. We can read Acadian or
 
Babylonian Sumerian pretty well
 
fluently. That's not a problem. So the
 
information which you can get from these
 
sources especially three millennia of
 
sources is very very substantial
 
very substantial but it means that a
 
seriologists have the um inbuilt idea
 
that what we have is something like all
 
there ever was which is absurd for
 
example there's a period called the
 
earth three period where people lived in
 
city states they wrote very small
 
account tablets by the thousand and
 
there were two or three major cities
 
where this is the way they lived. People
 
had to bring tithes and offerings and
 
everything was recorded by what I always
 
refer to and people sympathize with as
 
the ancestors of the inland revenue
 
because everything had to be written
 
down so that some schmuck could check it
 
and fill out the ledger and some other
 
schmuck above him could okay it so there
 
was no funny business or no mistakes.
 
Now the thing is there are thousands of
 
those tablets written in about 2,100 to
 
2,000 BC. Thousands of them about size
 
of a box of matches. So people like to
 
generalize about the Sumerianss at this
 
time of the world. But they probably all
 
came out of two rooms
 
because they were dumped when they were
 
no longer needed in some kind of room.
 
And the archaeologists in the 19th
 
century came down on these and then all
 
the locals came and they bought dug them
 
up and they sold them all over the place
 
and they gone all over the world.
 
Thousands and thousands of them out of
 
probably two storage rooms which is not
 
a whole culture or a whole country or
 
their whole history or their belief
 
systems. So our view of it is sued by
 
the nature of the material. And
 
sometimes the material is opulent and
 
benevolent but not always. And sometimes
 
the people who work with Sloo material
 
don't even realize how Slude it is. I
 
mean, you know, it's quite remarkable.
 
&gt;&gt; So you in all your time of studying
 
Kaoform tablets, do you sometimes late
 
at night get a glimpse of the waterfall?
 
Like can you imagine?
 
&gt;&gt; Yes, I can imagine. I can imagine easily
 
because once in a while a library is
 
discovered in the 1850s at Nineve which
 
was the Assyrian capital there was a fat
 
king king of the world called Asha
 
Barnipal and he had a fantastic library
 
and he promoted it he impounded tablets
 
he had them brought in he wanted all the
 
prevailing knowledge and all knowledge
 
from before under one roof it's a kind
 
of like Alexandria thing so he was a
 
trained scholar and this is what he did
 
and they found In the 19th century, they
 
dug it up. Leard and those people. So,
 
what did they find? They found the
 
tablets higgledy piggledy all over the
 
floor of a huge room and in the
 
corridors and everything and lots of
 
them broken and lots of them burnt.
 
So, ever since then until really quite
 
recently,
 
seriologists have spent all their people
 
who work on these nit joining the bits
 
together. And you have the story about
 
Gilgamesh and the goddess who falls in
 
love with him in the garden and she
 
wants to seduce him and dot dot dot you
 
can't find a bit so you look for another
 
bit. You look for another bit and
 
gradually they piece together the
 
literature and the assumption has always
 
been that if you put them all together
 
again you'll have the whole library.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
 
&gt;&gt; But it's the absolute opposite because
 
what happened was that the Babylonians
 
in the south in my opinion
 
they they worked handin glove with the
 
Elummites from Iran. They had a pinser
 
movement and they beat Assyria. They
 
conquered Assyria. They ran through the
 
capital and they set fire to everything,
 
pinched all the women and to all the
 
jewelry and all the gold. And the people
 
say that in a fit of peak, they
 
destroyed the library. But they wouldn't
 
destroy the library because it was the
 
giant brain from which the Assyrians ran
 
a world empire and it had all the
 
knowledge in the world. They destroyed
 
that. They spoke the same language. They
 
had the same writing system. They'd have
 
taken them all safely home. cart after
 
cart after cart. And I think what's left
 
there is duplicates and broken things
 
and things that got dropped and
 
everything. And that's what everyone
 
thinks is it.
 
&gt;&gt; So this is also unc is a controversial
 
project.
 
&gt;&gt; You're just nontoping.
 
It's common sense. You're going to get
 
both of us can today.
 
&gt;&gt; But you see the thing you see the thing.
 
It's predicated on the assumption that
 
what we have is what there only what
 
there was. And this is such a fallacy.
 
It needs to be attacked left, right and
 
center.
 
&gt;&gt; So a lot of the kunea form language is
 
already deciphered.
 
&gt;&gt; Sure.
 
&gt;&gt; Can you speak to the the deciphering
 
process? How hard is it? Maybe take us
 
to this place of uh for you yourself
 
first learning the language, figuring
 
out the puzzle of it. How does it feel
 
the how does it look like to to a brain
 
that doesn't deeply understand it? And
 
how do you then piece stuff together?
 
Maybe you can go to the the early days
 
sort of the the Rosetta Stone of Kao
 
form also.
 
&gt;&gt; That's important. Well, the first thing
 
is is that how the Kunoifor writing
 
system works because the crucial point
 
and once you see it is makes a lot of
 
things clear is that they wrote in
 
syllables.
 
So if you take the English alphabet,
 
which of course they didn't, you had the
 
letter B, G, D, P, H, and so forth. They
 
couldn't write a consonant. They
 
couldn't do that. So what they did is
 
they had a vowel before a consonant or
 
one after. So you have ab and ba. But as
 
they had four vowels, you had to have ab
 
and ba, ib and b, and b, e and be.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So you had the the range of things
 
clustered around what we call a
 
consonant. So they had all those for all
 
the letters which gave them a basic
 
system. There was much more to it than
 
that and it was more complicated than
 
that but we don't have to really go into
 
it but basically if you are a Babylonian
 
and um you want to write the word museum
 
which of course is one of the most
 
important words in the English language
 
and other languages too. So what you
 
would do is you would write the syllable
 
moo.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; And then the sign z and then the sign.
 
So you split the word up into its
 
component syllables. When you read it in
 
your mind, you squash them together into
 
museum. That's the basic system. They
 
had other signs which gave you a clue as
 
to the meaning and bits around the edge.
 
But it's basically salabic writing.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So when you go to university to
 
study kuneaoiform
 
what you have to learn is all the signs
 
and all their values because
 
unfortunately they didn't just have one
 
for each they had multiple ones and the
 
reason is not that they were mad or they
 
wanted to make life hell but because the
 
syllables derived from the writing of
 
Sumerian words. So the Sumerian
 
vocabulary had a lot of words that were
 
probably differentiated by tone.
 
&gt;&gt; So you might have bar and then a rising
 
a and then a lowering. And these signs
 
all retain the bar value even though
 
there were no tones. So it means if you
 
look at a sign list, there's a lot of
 
signs. You have bar number one, which is
 
the common, then there's bar number two,
 
bar number three, and you have to learn
 
them all. And when you read, you have to
 
learn how to do it. So when in the
 
modern world if you go to university to
 
to do a seriology which I hope you and
 
all of your disciples will do as soon as
 
possible you actually have to cope with
 
two languages the Sumerian and the
 
Babylonian. Now the first thing is this
 
that the Babylonian language is a smitic
 
tongue which although it's extinct
 
is connected to or related to Hebrew,
 
Aramaic, Arabic, Ethiopic, Syriak all
 
that family of Semitic languages which
 
are still alive. It's an early example
 
of one of those. So that when the
 
decipherment came along, it was the
 
Semitic dictionary that they fell back
 
on to identify words, nouns, and roots.
 
The other language, which is Sumerian,
 
the one when you stick bits in the
 
beginning and stick bits at the end, is
 
not only not Semitic. It's not related
 
to any other known language.
 
&gt;&gt; Oh no.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This is a bewitching thing. It's a
 
bewitching thing to me. And this is how
 
to understand it because the languages
 
that we study in the world today,
 
linguists study, they more or less all
 
fall into a language group. So you have
 
Indo-Uropean with Spanish, Italian,
 
Latin, Hittite,
 
and so forth. And so that's why French,
 
that's one group, and you have Germanic,
 
and you have Savonic. And most
 
languages, even the far-flung ones, fall
 
into what can be seen to be maybe big
 
and airy groups. Their family like that.
 
There's not one for Sumerian. So this
 
means that the truth that languages do
 
not exist in a vacuum, but they're part
 
of a big family must always have been
 
true. So that when writing arrives about
 
3,00 say 300 BC
 
to write proper properly it means that
 
Sumerian was recorded just in time but
 
the big languages maybe in China in
 
Russia in somewhere else in Asia that
 
were related to Samrian
 
&gt;&gt; are gone
 
&gt;&gt; are all gone they're gone forever and
 
ever and ever unless something amazing
 
happens. So we've got the one
 
representative of this bizarre family
 
that
 
&gt;&gt; amazing.
 
&gt;&gt; It isn't. It's a very stimulating thing
 
to imagine. I personally believe that
 
neanderalars and early homo sapiens for
 
sure had language. For sure they talked
 
to one another. It's impossible that
 
they didn't. The point came when they
 
did. They did. And in the ant, thousand
 
years of rule living in Europe, they had
 
to deal with the ice age. They all live
 
together. They bring up their children.
 
You think they couldn't speak anything.
 
They have the same apparatus. And if you
 
have a human brain, then it responds to
 
stimulus. And the more stimulus there is
 
for communication, I mean, the idea that
 
you and I are out hunting rhino and and
 
and you say, "Lex,
 
shut up. I'm constant." Lex, Lex, and I
 
suddenly think, "Oh, I get it. You are
 
Lex." Right? You only have to do that
 
once. Then you know who I am. So I know
 
that I'm me and that you are you. So
 
people who say that they couldn't
 
distinguish ego and and all that, it's
 
absolutely stupid. If you cut your hand
 
with a knife, you sure as hell
 
experiencing.
 
You sure as hell do it hurts.
 
&gt;&gt; It hurts a lot. You might even bleed to
 
death, but it's not somebody else's
 
hand.
 
And it's your hand and it's your
 
existence and your life that threatened.
 
You think people weren't conscious that
 
they were an entity? I don't believe it.
 
And they probably had a way to express
 
that with sounds.
 
&gt;&gt; Well, eventually, yes, names. I mean,
 
names. Names are things. And then you
 
have a the idea that a label fixes to
 
something. Then the light bulb has gone
 
on and next minute you have rhino and
 
you have skin and you have babies and
 
you have because I think you have an
 
idea and the idea then drives the brain
 
and the brain has another idea. It works
 
like fertility.
 
&gt;&gt; So what do you think is the motivation
 
the primary driver of developing written
 
language? Is it is it goes hand inhand
 
with uh civilization?
 
&gt;&gt; I think that the media in which it
 
appears is when there's a lot of people
 
living in an urban environment
 
&gt;&gt; and w with with rival institutions or
 
the king or with the government or all
 
those sorts of things. And that's why I
 
think Geeklete must have been the same
 
thing. I read somewhere that they're all
 
nomads and they only came to go you know
 
3 months. I mean that cannot be true
 
that they were nomads and they cannot be
 
true to get the stone and someone has to
 
draw on the ground the plan of the
 
building they have to work out how thick
 
it is going to be how high it's going to
 
be and I mean you know you can't just
 
you know like that like gorillas
 
&gt;&gt; uh all right so deciphering the process
 
of deciphering
 
&gt;&gt; so when I started there were grammarss
 
and sign lists and dictionaries
 
everything was marvelous it was all
 
basically deciphered. All you had to do
 
is get on with learning it. But at the
 
beginning when the first tablets and
 
bricks in Kunea form and stone
 
inscriptions came to light, no one could
 
read them. But they knew they were
 
writing, but they didn't know how to
 
read them. And what happened was, like
 
you said before with the Rosetta Stone,
 
it was something directly comparable
 
because there was um an inscription of
 
one of the Persian kings halfway up a
 
mountain in a place called Bisutun
 
where this king Darius had written an
 
account of his successful career in
 
Elilumite and in Babylonian and in old
 
Persian triilingual version and old
 
Persian although it is a obviously a
 
archaic form of the language Persian is
 
still alive it was still alive in the
 
19th century so they since the old
 
Persian was written in a very simple
 
style of kunea form they deciphered it
 
they twigged it was old Persian they
 
read it in Persian and they read the
 
names Darush in old Persian and then
 
suddenly somebody realized that the
 
other two columns about the same length
 
&gt;&gt; brilliant
 
&gt;&gt; what do you know and the thing is it
 
said I am das the great King, king of
 
the working son of
 
grandson of so there's a whole paragraph
 
with repeated things in the Persian
 
which they could understand. So what do
 
you know they're reiterated passages in
 
the other two languages. So that was the
 
key that that kind of the chisel that
 
opened up kunoiform writing proper and
 
the thing was they soon twigged that the
 
language of the Babylonian was a smitic
 
tongue and this was so important. I
 
think the first word they discovered was
 
the word for river which is naru in
 
Aadian and nar in Arabic and Aramaic.
 
And when they realized that the word
 
that corresponded to the Persian had
 
this form, this was a gift a gift of
 
gold because everybody immediately sees
 
their Arabic and Hebrew dictionaries and
 
started leafing through looking for
 
words that would fit in the context. And
 
they basically they deciphered this
 
inscription in that sort of way. And of
 
course all the other inscriptions came
 
in order and there were lots and lots of
 
difficulties which had to be resolved.
 
But that's the basic thing. And without
 
that triilingual
 
um I don't know what would have
 
happened. I mean I suppose it's
 
conceivable that in the very modern
 
world something might have happened but
 
as it was it was done by sheer brain
 
power by very very clever persons just
 
doing it and they they cracked it. The
 
Elumite language is much more difficult
 
but they got a lot of it too. So it was
 
a very romantic thing because the
 
inscription was carved on a mountain
 
face far above the plane and um Henry
 
Roinson who was a upstanding young
 
British officer who claimed to decipher
 
Cana form quite unjustifiably climbed up
 
there with some miserable kid and made
 
squeezes of the whole thing overlooking
 
the plane thousands of feet up in the
 
air and brought those back and they were
 
used in the decipherment. So it's very
 
romantic.
 
&gt;&gt; Wait a minute. more controversial
 
statement from Muring today. Henry
 
Rollinsson doesn't deserve the credit
 
for that.
 
&gt;&gt; No, I don't think he does. He's he's
 
he's called the father of a seriology,
 
but I think he's the stepfather of a
 
seriology because when he first got
 
these inscriptions, he wrote a long book
 
about it, which was almost entirely
 
wrong.
 
And there was a clergyman in Northern
 
Ireland called Edward Hinks
 
who lived in a place called Kilerlay and
 
had five daughters and ran this church
 
who was um possibly a card carrying
 
genius if not jolly jolly clothes. And
 
what happened with with him was this.
 
There was um an ongoing competition well
 
an ongoing challenge to decipher
 
hieroglyphic writing which Sholon
 
usually gets the credit for. And Hinx
 
was very interested in trying to
 
decipher hieroglyphic ahead of the
 
French
 
and he ran into a sort of dead end at
 
one stage and he thought he'd have a
 
look at Kunea form to see if it was
 
helpful
 
and at the same time he cracked it. He
 
worked out how it worked. He realized
 
that one sign can have more than one
 
value of sound and of meaning because
 
they are multivalent signs. I tried to
 
shelter you from the horrible news, but
 
it actually it's not it's not a walk in
 
the park. It takes about 5 years to to
 
um you probably do it in about four
 
probably.
 
&gt;&gt; That is a compliment. I think you just
 
complimented me. Uh thank you. Thank you
 
very much.
 
So what So you're saying one one sign
 
that looks exactly the same might have
 
different sounds given the context.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you have to choose the right
 
sound and and and also different meaning
 
as well because for example if you if
 
you have a sign for hot word hot right
 
you you can't really have a picture sign
 
for hot
 
doesn't make sense but what they did is
 
they did a drawing of a kind of um
 
complex thing with a brazer inside
 
another sign which meant hot. So that
 
sign existed but it also meant other
 
things as well and you had to choose the
 
right one for the contest. is all a
 
context to matter. I mean, it really is
 
quite a matter for despair when you
 
start ka form because on top of
 
everything else, they didn't leave gaps
 
between the words. They're all
 
connected. That's really mean. Yeah. So
 
when you read um what you have to do you
 
start with the first sign and you think
 
of the sign list and you go through the
 
values in your mind and there's next
 
sign and if one is bar and the next one
 
is ab among other readings bar ab sounds
 
like a syllable structure for a word and
 
you go on like that.
 
&gt;&gt; So there are two things about it. One is
 
that if you want to you can master it.
 
The other thing is that the number of
 
variables was restricted. They
 
controlled it. So it wasn't insane. So
 
in other words, if you learn the corpus
 
and you learn how the signs are composed
 
and you learn their different values,
 
then you've got it down
 
&gt;&gt; and off you go. And and um it's it's
 
very beautiful. I think it's it's
 
marvelous.
 
&gt;&gt; Can you in all seriousness take me back
 
to the time when you were learning it?
 
What's the process of learning it? Well,
 
I had very abnormal upbringing because
 
when I went to university um for about
 
three years beforehand, I'd wanted to be
 
an Egyptologist.
 
&gt;&gt; So, I'd read the grammar by gardener and
 
was looking forward very much to
 
studying ancient Egyptian. And what
 
happened was that I went up to the
 
University of Birmingham where I went to
 
university. And uh there was a man
 
called Rd Clark who was an Egyptologist.
 
And Ronald Clark came in on the Monday
 
and gave us one lesson about Egyptian
 
sculpture or something like that. And
 
the next minute he next day he died.
 
Bang.
 
So, uh, the professor called me into his
 
room and said, "Look, it's going to take
 
me a while to get an Egyptologist. They
 
don't grow on trees." Um, but there's
 
another person in this department who
 
teaches another ancient language called
 
Lambert, and he teaches Kunea form. So,
 
what I suggest is you go and do a bit of
 
kunea form with professor Lambert, and
 
then when I get an Egyptologist, you can
 
convert back.
 
So, I go and knock on the door. Yes. Um,
 
so I went in and said, I want to learn
 
cano form. And, uh, Professor Lambert,
 
who was rather a Sherlock Holmes kind of
 
figure, aesthetic, bony, sarcastic,
 
cruel,
 
&gt;&gt; cruel,
 
&gt;&gt; cruel, absolutely terrifying. Um, and I
 
said, um, I I wanted to learn ka form.
 
and he wasn't at all pleased because
 
this was a time in Britain when um
 
professors
 
resented having students to teach
 
because it buttered into their research
 
time. It was that sort of arrangement.
 
Anyway, I started it off and after about
 
I don't know maybe one or maybe two
 
lessons, I knew this was going to be my
 
life's work. So that's what happened to
 
me.
 
&gt;&gt; It was an amazing thing. So he gave me a
 
list of signs to learn basic signs. So I
 
did and the next couple of days and then
 
we came in and he we started reading.
 
&gt;&gt; So given the complexity of the signs,
 
why did Kuneaform last 3,000 years, the
 
most successful writing system ever?
 
&gt;&gt; Fair question. There are several
 
factors. One is the famous factor of
 
inertia.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm. The second thing is that people who
 
could read and write and were in charge
 
of archives and with the clarks in the
 
temple and the um writers for the king
 
and everything commanded a very great
 
deal of power because most of the public
 
couldn't.
 
&gt;&gt; So they reserved to themselves
 
knowledge, understanding,
 
philosophical inquiry. I mean, no doubt
 
it went on in pubs and things, but they
 
were they were in charge. They had
 
everything under lock and key and they
 
were I think the scribal schools are
 
rather claky. They were certainly um
 
clicky in the sense of Oxford and
 
Cambridge being rivals, that sort of
 
thing. They had that sort of idea and it
 
was in no one's interest whatsoever.
 
Nobody would ever concede any interest
 
in the idea of literacy for all. This
 
would be
 
it would never be thought of and it
 
would be anathema and so if you got on a
 
soap box on a Saturday afternoon and say
 
ah enough of this we have to teach the
 
children
 
&gt;&gt; they'd be taken away I think
 
&gt;&gt; so we're getting in these tablets the
 
output of the intellectual class a very
 
small fraction of humans so we're
 
getting just the Oxford and the
 
Cambridge
 
&gt;&gt; we are except this that when you went to
 
scribal school you had to learn Samrian
 
and Aadian the language languages
 
properly and all the vocabulary and the
 
grammar.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So some boys probably had a lot of
 
trouble doing this and you know they
 
were okay but then there ain't going to
 
be no geniuses. And I think the
 
situation in the school was that the
 
teachers farmed out the kids who would
 
actually rather have been outside
 
playing football but could read and
 
write to earning their living doing
 
lowlevel reading and writing. That's to
 
say writing contracts, letters, everyday
 
things for people because no one could
 
read and write. So you had to get a
 
scribe if you're going to marry your
 
daughter off and you get all the
 
witnesses about the presents and all
 
this all the thing had to be done for 4
 
days. So the writer would come and and
 
do so your your medium-level writers
 
would serve that requirement and very
 
talented or clever or intellectual
 
students would be encouraged to go into
 
one of the literary professions which
 
would be so to speak,
 
law, working for the king, working for
 
the church, I mean the priesthood. So
 
all those things which were dependent
 
upon archives and writing they would
 
find their nevo and also um architecture
 
because if a big building had to be
 
built then somebody had to know about
 
loadbearing things and brick
 
measurements and so some of them went
 
into that kind of work and also probably
 
some of them went into running the army
 
and they had to move stores and animals
 
and so they they found their neo and
 
some of them were intellectually very
 
able indeed And they went into
 
um the disciplines of on the one hand
 
astrology but more seriously into
 
astronomy
 
and theoretical grammar because they
 
they had treatises about the
 
relationship between the two languages
 
and how they worked and different parts
 
of speech and and they wrote learned
 
commentaries as well what words meant.
 
So there was an intellectual
 
highlevel top and then there were lots
 
of professional scribes and then the the
 
kids who left school as soon as possible
 
and uh did all that like today. I
 
apologize to be philosophical but
 
Winkenstein the philosopher said that
 
the limits of our language is the limits
 
of our world. So to which degree did the
 
languages that were encoded in Kunea
 
form define human civilization would you
 
say? what what were the what were the
 
things that were complicated to express
 
and therefore were not expressed often?
 
&gt;&gt; That's a really interesting question. So
 
um in terms of uh richness of vocabulary
 
and richness of verbal subtlety,
 
I think Babylonian rivals Arabic and of
 
course English. You know, in other
 
words, you can say whatever you want in
 
English.
 
&gt;&gt; However subtle it might be, even if
 
people didn't understand the subtlety,
 
you can because the tools are fantastic.
 
And Arabic has lots of synonyms and lots
 
of devices and all the same in
 
Babylonian. It was a fullyfledged
 
literary language. The question about
 
about whether the language put a stop to
 
further things as which is basically
 
what you're asking
 
&gt;&gt; is immensely complicated. But the one
 
thing that strikes me as relevant is
 
that a very huge proportion of scholarly
 
literature in Mesopotamia, it takes the
 
form of omens because they believed that
 
events accidental or deliberately
 
stimulated had implications for what was
 
going to happen.
 
&gt;&gt; And they took omens from things in the
 
sky and uh things in the street and
 
every single thing. If you were a
 
well-qualified divine, they would have
 
this significance. Right?
 
Now, there are thousands of lines of
 
omens of all different kinds. And in
 
Aadian, it says, for example, if a
 
lizard runs across the breakfast table,
 
the queen will die. So, if you translate
 
the Aadian this way, the word if verb
 
and everything, if that, then this. So
 
there are thousands of thousands of
 
lines translated in many books about
 
omens where if this happens that will
 
happen. So this is how is understood by
 
my colleagues.
 
Well, this is absolutely impossible
 
because if you are you're the you're the
 
chief diver of the king and you open up
 
a sheep to take a liver out and examine
 
it according to the if the queen's going
 
to die and the king's there, you're not
 
going to say, uh, the queen's going to
 
die. I mean, you're going to like a
 
fucking idiot if she doesn't die. And if
 
she does die, you're going to be
 
responsible. So, all you can ever do and
 
ever, ever have been able to do is to
 
say there's a sign here that says that
 
the queen could die, meaning could die,
 
not will die. And therefore, the
 
requisite ritual or magic must
 
immediately swing into action to defer
 
the danger. So the point is that a
 
equals b is never true. It means that
 
with a b could be, might be, ought to
 
be, should be, could be true. All those
 
subtle things. So that the diver who
 
works from the king must have been a
 
philosopher who looks at the king, he
 
looks at the king and he knows what the
 
king wants him to say. So he has to tell
 
the king what he wants to hear. He has
 
to tell the king if it's bad news in
 
such a way that he doesn't mind or he
 
won't worry. It's the most beautiful
 
thing. It's so subtle. It's it's like a
 
it's like a violin conc. It can never
 
have been a equals b for a minute. So
 
the medical texts say if you do if a man
 
has this you do this he drinks this
 
he'll get better. Right? He says he'll
 
get better. So you ever met a doctor who
 
will say you do this you'll get better.
 
No they say all being well you'll be
 
back on your feet or I've seen this kind
 
of condition many times everything
 
should go fine. You should get better
 
you should be better soon but never you
 
will get better cuz what happens if you
 
die where are you?
 
&gt;&gt; The lawyers will show up.
 
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. So this means that not
 
expressable in Aadian grammar are these
 
modal verbs.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm. could, might, should, ought, they
 
can't be expressed grammatically. But it
 
is impossible. There was such a
 
magnificent literary language where they
 
didn't have these subtleties. It's
 
utterly impossible. And if you translate
 
he will um in a literary text he might
 
then the whole text is different. The
 
whole text is different.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Absolutely. And they don't. My
 
colleagues translate that. It says in
 
the grammar books
 
like that automatically there's no self
 
appraisal of the folly of it.
 
You have said that translation is part
 
archaeology, part detective work, part
 
poetry. Can we just speak about
 
translation and the art of it a bit
 
more?
 
&gt;&gt; Yes.
 
&gt;&gt; I mean it's such a such an incredible
 
discipline just like you said hinted at
 
just a subtle variation in a single word
 
can change everything. Well, you know,
 
the truth about translation
 
is that you never really have a word in
 
one language which precisely equates
 
another.
 
&gt;&gt; You never do. They're always a kind the
 
best you can do and sometimes it makes
 
no difference and sometimes it's really
 
quite misleading. And so
 
what people do when they learn Aadian is
 
they learn the Aadian word and they
 
learn the English translation. Right?
 
You have the paras to divide. So
 
whenever you have the verb parasu is
 
some form of divide or division but
 
actually it's not because divide is like
 
the primary root but there's maybe 10
 
nuances
 
of of what that can mean in English
 
where the one at the bottom and the one
 
at the top you'd hardly know they were
 
connected and the Chicago dictionary
 
which is such a magnificent thing when
 
you come to the museum and see me I'll
 
show you this Chicago it's the most
 
salient and important thing that came
 
out of America in all its history is the
 
Chicago Assyrian dictionary which is
 
this long. There's only a one rival to
 
it for cultural importance which is the
 
electric guitar of course but the two of
 
them I think are your countrymen's
 
greatest achievements.
 
&gt;&gt; It's the pride of our nation. Those two
 
things
 
&gt;&gt; the very thing
 
&gt;&gt; Chicago diction can you I'm sorry to
 
take the tangent. What is the Chicago
 
dictionary? It started in the 20s and
 
they made a dictionary of the Babylonian
 
language a a to zed so to speak and it's
 
it's as long as this table it's
 
magnificent thing and this big and there
 
the people who worked on it were real
 
translators so they knew that it wasn't
 
lexically a means b so if you have
 
something in a proverb
 
you the meaning is going to be a bit
 
different from in a letter and you know
 
so people really really understand
 
oadian they really But this thing about
 
about the modal verbs is an interesting
 
conundrum to me because um there's no
 
way it's reflected in the writing. So I
 
can only assume that there was some kind
 
of drawing out of the vowel in a verb
 
meaning could you know like you saying
 
might do it you know something like
 
that. Anyway so nowadays we it's not a
 
decipherment that's the job. It's just
 
reading. And if you have lots of tablets
 
to work on like on a dig, it's very
 
exciting if they come out of the ground
 
and no one's looked for them before you
 
know it's your job. And if you're a
 
competent deriologist,
 
um you should be able to sight read more
 
or less except most say a letter or
 
something like that, but most documents
 
have some damage. So you have to learn
 
how to inter interpret stuff and also
 
some literature is very difficult
 
because of technical vocabulary and they
 
had technical vocabulary and unusual
 
words.
 
&gt;&gt; So you can do all of that. You can
 
kind of uh figure out the technical
 
complexities. You can figure out the the
 
noise meaning missing pieces.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Sometimes you can calculate to
 
what it ought to be, make a reasonable
 
suggestion and this dictionary which I
 
was talking to you about is such a
 
fantastic tool because a lot of people
 
worked on it for for it was the national
 
endowment for the humanities and it was
 
for decades and decades of work and most
 
of the world's best seriologists
 
collaborated on it. So the quality of
 
translation and understanding is really
 
extraordinary. What are some things
 
you've read from that time? Is there
 
some jokes? Is there some love letters?
 
&gt;&gt; There are one or two letters about from
 
a chap to a woman about, you know, you
 
are very beautiful and your lips are
 
like radishes and your ears are like
 
walruses and things, but I mean there
 
are some things like that. And there's a
 
kind of street drama in Babylon in 4th
 
century BC, something like that, when
 
there must have been actors who did this
 
in the street. And it's it's it's it's
 
Marduk and and Sarapanum's wife and
 
another woman. Marduk's having an affair
 
with this other
 
&gt;&gt; oh no
 
&gt;&gt; goddess
 
&gt;&gt; and Sopan is jealous and the women fight
 
in the street and heard insults of one
 
another and you know slot bucket and all
 
this kind of stuff is hilarious and it
 
must have been a bit like a sort of vi
 
opera without the music I suppose. I
 
don't know. But anyway, it starts off
 
when um Salonimum is in the room and
 
Marduk is in bed with this other goddess
 
on the roof and she can hear. You could
 
say it was an eternal human issue.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Love, heartbreak, jealousy,
 
all that
 
&gt;&gt; between deities also.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; Because deities are only modeled on
 
human beings after all. So
 
&gt;&gt; yeah, deities is grandiose way of
 
expressing human affairs, human
 
behaviors, human ways. Yeah.
 
Indeed,
 
&gt;&gt; in the writing, what was their
 
relationship to the divine relationship
 
with the divine? Well, the first thing
 
to say is that they had a large pantheon
 
of gods.
 
So, there were three gods at the top,
 
sometimes called Anu, Enlil and A. There
 
were three gods at the top and hundreds
 
of other gods and goddesses.
 
And you have the situation that I think
 
lots of small villages and towns had
 
their old ancient gods and eventually
 
they all worked into a kind of
 
theological system like a phone book and
 
the lesser minor gods were amalgamated
 
and then they were given jobs in the
 
households of the big gods. So there was
 
a sort of structure.
 
So you had this in the background a big
 
sweeping theology like you have in the
 
world today in some parts of the world.
 
And um this was the main system. And the
 
main gods were concerned with the ruler
 
and the fate of the country. And another
 
god was concerned with
 
illness and um the dead and what happens
 
to the dead. And they had other
 
specialtities. And they all had their
 
own temples. And when a baby came into
 
the world
 
um probably this was universally true.
 
the baby was put under the tutilage of
 
one or other of the gods. Sometimes you
 
know the royal family they were the big
 
shots but sometimes not or the ones that
 
were in the family or something like
 
that. So people had grew up with the
 
idea that among all of them there were
 
special ones for the family and they had
 
a special one who was supposed to look
 
after them. That's sort of basic idea.
 
But the trouble is since gods are as you
 
say human beings on a larger scale they
 
can be forgetful or uninterested or on
 
holiday and there are lots of ways that
 
you have to prompt your make little
 
sacrifices and little bribes so they do
 
their job and keep an eye on you. So
 
they had that kind of um slightly
 
practical view of gods that they were a
 
bit unpredictable great when they were
 
there but not always there. sort of
 
idea. And um I also believe this that a
 
lot of people in the world today who did
 
not have the disadvantage of growing up
 
in a stifening religion but are just
 
normal people get a lot more interested
 
when they're really ill or when they
 
have a big disaster all of a sudden. Um
 
God or gods seem a lot more important
 
than they do normally.
 
So that few people walk about in a state
 
of religious awe and a good proportion
 
of clergymen I've ever met don't do that
 
either. It's a kind of conception that's
 
not actually based on reality that the
 
individual's response to religious
 
stimula fluctuates and is varied and is
 
often a response to need. It doesn't
 
come from nothing. I mean people don't
 
suddenly feel I got to thank the Lord
 
for the rainbow or something like that.
 
I think this probably true today. I mean
 
when you read the investigations they
 
make of religion today. Christianity in
 
this country is on the decline because
 
people who are supposed to be Christians
 
say they aren't anymore. They're
 
atheists. So the people who say I go to
 
church and I believe and everything is a
 
relatively small number of people. So
 
now this is the situation which is quite
 
remarkable if you think about it. The
 
Lord knows what the consequence will be
 
for the human race. Whether religion
 
will
 
balance out, whether it will die off,
 
who knows?
 
&gt;&gt; I think it's an ancient technology that
 
has proven across millennia
 
to give a set of tools to humans to
 
contend as you as you said with
 
suffering that's a part of life. So when
 
mo those rare moments come when you have
 
to deal with deep pain, loss, suffering,
 
heartbreak, all those things.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; Looking up to the sky and asking
 
questions and trying to figure out the
 
answers in your conversation with the
 
divine.
 
&gt;&gt; I think that's true. But I think in
 
Mesopotamia it was different in terms of
 
its potency and immediiacy because
 
there's no skyscrapers in Iraq. You
 
know, if you live in southern Iraq and
 
you sleep on the roof and there no
 
lights at night, you know, you're under
 
the stars, you can see everything
 
because of no smog and everything like
 
that. And the idea that the gods are
 
there watching, it's not like a big
 
artifice like it is here. It just
 
doesn't ring true here. You can't come
 
to it and really believe in it. Whereas
 
these people didn't have to really
 
believe in it because it was it. It's
 
the obvious practical part of life.
 
They're right there.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But it's like they didn't believe
 
in ghosts. They took them for granted.
 
And they didn't believe in the gods.
 
They took them for granted. This is a
 
different mechanism because nobody here
 
in the world today takes those things
 
for granted. Just the opposite. But I
 
think that's how it worked. So you
 
didn't have people wrestling with the
 
idea of whether the gods really exist or
 
that whether they really care about me.
 
They gave them a nudge when it was
 
necessary.
 
And they might offer a this, they might
 
offer a that, but they it was this it
 
was the system. It was the prevailing
 
system. And I think it's an important
 
difference. And also that thing about
 
ghosts is that it's clear from the
 
inscriptions all of them that I managed
 
to find that nobody ever asked
 
themselves,
 
did do these things exist or not? Or did
 
I really see them or not? Or did I not?
 
They didn't. They didn't. They just took
 
it all for granted.
 
&gt;&gt; What are ghosts? Is it usually
 
ancestors?
 
&gt;&gt; Um, well, everybody, everybody who died
 
in bed naturally or peacefully, what we
 
call their ghost, went down to the
 
nether world
 
and there they were. So, they buried
 
people jolly quick um for obvious
 
reasons and like they do in Islam and
 
Judaism today, it's the same kind of
 
idea. and uh the spirit of the person
 
went down through the gates to the
 
netherworld and stayed there.
 
So that's the basic situation. And
 
people in their houses had actual
 
burials under the courtyard and they had
 
a thing where you pour stuff down a hole
 
fluid and food kind of symbolic
 
offerings to the to them.
 
&gt;&gt; So is that a way to lessen the impact of
 
mortality? I don't know because you know
 
that everyone's going to die. I think
 
the real tragedy would be is if we're
 
not supposed to. That would be the
 
tragedy. But every single person
 
is going to die. So all relationships
 
have this finite clause in them. So if
 
you're very fond of somebody or you love
 
somebody and they die, it's kind of
 
infantile to whine about it ever after
 
because what do you think was going to
 
happen? Either you or them, you know, I
 
I always see it like that. I don't feel
 
grief when people die.
 
&gt;&gt; It is infantile. But I got to tell you
 
something about human beings. We're all
 
kind of infantile all the way through
 
from, you know, we don't stop being
 
infantile after we're infants. It's it's
 
one thing to know it,
 
you know, theoretically and it's another
 
thing to know it know it like this thing
 
ends. This ride ends
 
&gt;&gt; but that's the pain. It's the fact that
 
the whole thing ends. And when people
 
fall off the edge,
 
&gt;&gt; they fall off the edge.
 
&gt;&gt; So yeah, the knowledge that it ends is
 
the painful thing, not the actual moment
 
of the ending. Yeah. Many times what
 
makes moments really precious is that
 
they're going to be gone. I think that's
 
not a trivial thing for us humans to
 
really contend with. I think religion,
 
religious thought, the divine, I think,
 
help with that.
 
&gt;&gt; I I think the big mistake for mankind
 
was the creation of monotheistic
 
religions because they brought evil into
 
the world because if you believe in a
 
monotheistic religion, it means I'm
 
right and you're wrong if you don't. So,
 
it's already on that footing. That's
 
&gt;&gt; very dogmatic. Yeah,
 
&gt;&gt; dogmatic and it's led to everything.
 
Inquisitions and this, you know, all
 
this kind of stuff. It's all as a result
 
of it that one religion is superior and
 
the other should be stamped out and all
 
that. And in my opinion, the
 
monotheistic religion has generated the
 
most fantastic amount of non-religious
 
feeling. Whereas when you have all the
 
different gods and have different
 
specialtities and the ones you like and
 
the ones everybody likes and they have
 
their temples and their offerings. It
 
was very interesting to me to go um into
 
a temple in Kolkata when I went to there
 
with my wife Joanna. We went into the
 
temples and saw how they were and I
 
think they must be very much like the
 
ones in Mesopotamia. So there was never
 
anything about them which affronted
 
people's individuality
 
or or or I mean there's no religious
 
prejudice or even racial prejudice in
 
antiquity. All these things are modern
 
disadvantageous matters. If you think
 
what's done in the name of religion, it
 
is absolutely staggering.
 
&gt;&gt; So let's talk go to literature because
 
uh we didn't really mention literature
 
much except you did briefly mention Epic
 
of Gilgamesh. Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; So that was written in Kunea form. It's
 
one of the earliest works of literature.
 
&gt;&gt; That's right.
 
&gt;&gt; Uh can you tell me about this work?
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, we know it best from this
 
Assyrian library set of tablets. There
 
are 12 of them. It's a 12 tablet work.
 
It's quite long. And Gilgamesh is the
 
hero of it. But the literature, we know
 
it from earlier texts and we know that
 
Gilgamesh lived. He was a real person.
 
He was a king in Uruk and he was one of
 
those people who lived after their death
 
in the world like Alexander for example.
 
So there were stories about Gilgamesh
 
when he was alive. There were stories
 
about him afterwards and they firstly
 
they were oral literature
 
not written down at all and then around
 
the 1800s people started to write them
 
down in Samrian or Babylonian. So there
 
was a corpus and eventually they were
 
woven into this long 12 homeriic type
 
thing about the adventures of Gilgamesh.
 
So it is certainly literature and um
 
it's to do with humanity and immortality
 
and um man in the hands of the gods and
 
um incorporates lots of interesting
 
exciting stories. It's very Hollywood
 
kind of thing and you can see within it
 
um even in the sophisticated nine
 
version its roots are in oral literature
 
because when somebody speaks it says
 
Gilgamesh opened his mouth to speak and
 
addressed his friend Enkidu and then
 
there's a speech and then Enkidu opened
 
his mouth and addressed his friend
 
Gilgamesh. Well, when you're reading a
 
story, you don't need that.
 
And that must be because of when there
 
was when there was a enacting of an oral
 
thing a narrator would say and it
 
suddenly got frozen into the text. So
 
it's it's very strange thing because if
 
you're reading it is obvious that one
 
person speaks and the other person
 
speaks and and they always have this
 
complicated thing stuck in the text. So
 
it must be an echo of presumably you
 
have your protagonists
 
um enacting their timeless matter with a
 
with a and the person who's writing it
 
down says and then Gilgamesh said you
 
know like like in a like in a script
 
&gt;&gt; I mean what what can you say about this
 
the the telling of stories in written
 
form during that time? Do you think that
 
too stretched back in time?
 
&gt;&gt; I do. I think the fireside narrative
 
matter. You know, when we were kids, it
 
would be twerps with a guitar um sitting
 
around a fire on holiday. But that
 
mechanism when people gather after dark
 
when there is a fire and talk is the
 
sort of environment where
 
narrative accounts flourish naturally
 
among human beings.
 
&gt;&gt; Stories telling a story. It doesn't have
 
to be pragmatic. It can be literary in
 
in a way.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. either a human person like
 
Gilgamesh or stories about the gods and
 
someone sees the Milky Way and they
 
think there's a god riding a chariot up
 
it and then they have a story about you
 
know and all those sorts of things and
 
or whatever it would be but I think
 
probably you have to allow for a strong
 
creative
 
principle surfacing in homo sapiens at a
 
quite early age because the paintings on
 
cave walls you try drawing a running
 
antelope in color on a wall. I mean the
 
quality of the workmanship of the
 
artistic ability is
 
unsurpassable. It's not just good. So
 
how is that an explicable thing at this
 
very early date? It means
 
that among all the population you have
 
imbecile and Einstein's and somewhere
 
along the line you have Rembrandt. And I
 
imagine that half the cake cave
 
paintings in Europe were done by one
 
person. I mean they you got the
 
impression every family had a genius
 
painter. It's impossible. Probably there
 
was a person who went from place to
 
place doing these paintings because they
 
were so could draw straight away
 
accurately like that. But the they are a
 
distillation of creative artistic
 
ability plus skill. So this this is
 
right at the pretty early stage is it
 
not the cave painting material. So if
 
you consider the human stock which
 
encapsulates such ideas ever after
 
then you have to reckon with that you
 
have to reckon with that very creative
 
very creative people. So the function of
 
stories to tell the young and um about
 
what happened and about famous battles
 
or when the flood came or how people
 
learn to make fire or you know how we
 
invented the wheel all those sorts of
 
things everybody put puts down as but
 
that's presumably what absolutely
 
happened and you have the capacity for
 
people to adore and to respect among
 
their own kind people of astounding
 
ability. There must have been hunters
 
who were ferociously quick and you know
 
wrestle with polar bears and all that
 
kind of and all this stuff would be
 
gristed the narrator thing and things
 
got more complicated and more
 
sophisticated. So lessons might be
 
incorporated or lessons might come out
 
of them unintentionally because if you
 
tell a story without a moral, it is
 
usually a moral if you if you think
 
about it
 
&gt;&gt; and many of those stories are sadly lost
 
to time or not yet found.
 
&gt;&gt; You mentioned floods and speaking of
 
stories that have been lost and found.
 
You're well known for a lot of things.
 
One of them is decoding the so-called
 
ark tablet. Yeah, that was a challenge
 
because it's really hard to read.
 
&gt;&gt; You got to tell me the story. This uh
 
ancient Babylonian clay tablet dating
 
1700 BC which contains a flood narrative
 
that predates the biblical story of Noah
 
by a thousand years
 
&gt;&gt; at least.
 
&gt;&gt; At least.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; Okay. Well, you got to tell me the full
 
story.
 
&gt;&gt; So, the full story is like this.
 
Visitors used to come to the museum um
 
to ask questions of the experts who
 
worked there and one would be on duty
 
periodically and sometimes people would
 
bring objects, sometimes they'd ask
 
questions and somebody once came in with
 
a whole load of objects including this
 
tablet which to cut a long story short I
 
identified pretty much straight away as
 
being part of the flood story. It was a
 
tablet about 8 in by 3. Not the whole
 
flood story which is the complex
 
narrative which ended up in the
 
Gilgamesh narrative much much later. But
 
this one was an early narrative in which
 
the point was taken up where the gods in
 
heaven had decided that the population
 
of Mesopotamia needed to be wiped out
 
because they were so noisy.
 
&gt;&gt; This was the expression. and the gods
 
couldn't sleep after lunch sort of
 
thing. So they decided they would write
 
them out and create something quieter
 
that worked harder. So this was the
 
basic mechanism and they had different
 
ways of doing it. And then the most
 
effective one was they were going to
 
send a flood to wipe them all out. And
 
one of the gods, the number three in the
 
triumvirate thought this was a
 
deplorable idea. So he took it upon
 
himself to warn this person called
 
Atraasis who lived in Mesopotamia to
 
build a boat to rescue life when the
 
waters came. And in it he told him the
 
shape of it and the materials he would
 
need and how much he would need of the
 
materials um so he could do it safely.
 
And in the 60 lines of the tablet all
 
this stuff was there. It was like a
 
blueprint to build this boat. And the it
 
was is extraordinary because it was
 
round the boat. Um and everybody who
 
knew their Bible the arcs sort of coffin
 
shape kind of affair and nobody thought
 
of it being a round boat. And um
 
the fact is that round boats um weren't
 
used in Mesopotamia on on the rivers
 
corals that's to say because for
 
transporting things and um they would
 
never sink. They were very
 
appropriate and and so in this story it
 
was decided it was going to be a giant
 
coral a really really big one that would
 
never sing and the male and female
 
animals could go in and the Adraasi's
 
wife and his three sons and so forth
 
could go in and everything would be
 
there and it would float on the water
 
&gt;&gt; and when it came down they said we'll
 
start all over again. So it it's it's
 
got very many points in common with the
 
the description of the flood in Genesis.
 
And of course so did the one in
 
Gilgamesh. So in 1872
 
there was a um an a seriologist in the
 
British Museum called George Smith and
 
he was a very very talented reader. And
 
in 1872, he discovered that one of the
 
tablets from the Nineveh library we were
 
talking about before had on it a passage
 
which ran in parallel with Gilgamesh
 
about the waters coming and the boat and
 
everybody floating. And even to the
 
point that when the rain stopped and the
 
ark came to rest on a mountain that the
 
hero of this thing in Gilgamesh who was
 
called Napishim released a bird three
 
times to see whether the trees had come
 
up and the first one came back and the
 
second one and the third one didn't. So
 
he knew that. So this was not only in
 
the epig of Gilgamesh but it was also in
 
the book of Genesis. So what it meant
 
was that it wasn't you couldn't have two
 
stories. It wasn't two stories about the
 
same thing. It was literary dependence.
 
It was literary dependence. One was
 
locked into the other. The text of the
 
Hebrew Bible from whenever it was
 
written down. Of course, nobody knows
 
quite when, but whenever it was, it was
 
about the same time as the one from Nin,
 
about the 7th century, 6th, something
 
like that, that the that the time
 
interval between the Gilgamesh version
 
from Nineveh and the Hebrew Bible is not
 
like a big expanse of time. So, there
 
was an argument that one goes this way
 
and one goes that way. But when this
 
tablet came in a thousand years old,
 
nobody believes the Bible was written in
 
1700 BC.
 
So the primacy of the Mesopotamian
 
matter was established. And it's
 
important because you never get floods
 
in Jerusalem.
 
You just don't. But in Mesopotamia, they
 
had floods. The rivers, sometimes there
 
wasn't enough water. Sometimes it was
 
too much. Sometimes it was far too much
 
water. So the mechanism that the waters
 
could be used as a destructive force by
 
the powers that be is a plausible
 
Mesopotamian mechanism and it's based in
 
a sort of sense in my opinion in reality
 
I think there must have been some
 
tsunami once most people were drowned
 
and those who survive were in boats
 
obviously and then afterwards nobody
 
ever forgot it and it went on and on. I
 
mean uh there actually could have been a
 
catastrophic event of a large
 
&gt;&gt; not the whole world cuz people
 
&gt;&gt; but just enough to imagine
 
&gt;&gt; yeah sweeping down to the Persian Gulf
 
and you know the flat plains everything
 
would be destroyed all the houses will
 
be destroyed and animals will be drowned
 
and
 
&gt;&gt; this is an incredible discovery. Do you
 
think it's possible that this is the
 
original? There are flood myths in many
 
cultures. I believe this. The
 
Mesopotamians had a deep-seated horror
 
of dependency on water when they
 
couldn't control it. They were fearful
 
of it.
 
And they had a rainbow in Babylonia like
 
in the Bible as a proof that the
 
disastrous flood would never happen
 
again. But I think there must have been
 
one episode of this kind, maybe 5,000
 
years before the tablet, 10,000. It
 
doesn't matter because with the passage
 
of time nothing happens in that part of
 
the world. So something will be alive
 
grandfather to grandson before you go to
 
sleep and remember my boy you know you
 
only have to be careful because
 
otherwise and all that stuff for sure
 
bogey man stuff it never quite died out
 
in their conscious minds.
 
So I think that when the Judeans from
 
Jerusalem after the destruction of the
 
temple and the by the Babylonians and
 
the route of the priesthood and
 
everything, the king and the others went
 
over land to Babylon as refugees and
 
they had to live there for three
 
generations of time under
 
Nebuchadnezzar's reign. So I believe
 
that the text of the Bible was written
 
then because if you read the Bible
 
attentively, which I can't say I do on a
 
regular basis, but if you do read it
 
dispassionately,
 
um you have the mechanism that the early
 
books of the Bible explain to the reader
 
how it is that these people are in such
 
a mess because they're supposed to be
 
the chosen people doing all that. Look
 
at they haven't got a temple. They
 
haven't got a country. they're all
 
washed up and everything like that. So I
 
think
 
that what happened was was it's a
 
complex thing but the Judeans from
 
Jerusalem they spoke Hebrew but they
 
also spoke Aramaic right the two
 
languages their sister languages and the
 
Babylonians spoke Babylonian and they
 
also spoke Aramaic and they all wore the
 
same kind of clothes and they all had
 
brown skin and when the all these
 
refugees from Jerusalem were milling
 
around in Babylonia they would have
 
intermarried and disappeared within no
 
time at all. And the authorities who
 
were there prevented this by drawing up
 
a kind of charter of their history,
 
explaining things from the beginning of
 
time up until now, how it happened and
 
what happened and it was all
 
intentional.
 
So that is in my opinion the driving
 
force behind the Hebrew texts. And the
 
thing about it is that they didn't have
 
in Jewish philosophical tradition stuff
 
about creation and the beginning of the
 
world.
 
And they took Babylonian ideas which
 
they learned when they were there and
 
they recycled them.
 
So whereas the Babylonians decided that
 
the gods were going to wipe out the
 
noisy persons, when the Jewish
 
philosophers got this narrative to
 
recycle about about the vengeful
 
almighty, he was in the Old Testament
 
very unpleasant and vengeful person. It
 
was because of sin. It wasn't because of
 
racket and playing the radio. It was
 
sin. So they took one narrative and they
 
recycled it for their own purposes. The
 
flood is a useful tool to to punish
 
people for whatever X is.
 
&gt;&gt; That's exactly right. And something else
 
is this. Something else is this. Right.
 
You have five days to build the ark or
 
whatever it is or two weeks to build the
 
ark. So the clock goes tick tick tick
 
tick tick. And about a third of the
 
films that come out of Hollywood are the
 
world's going to be demolished by aliens
 
and you've got 24 hours to think of a
 
cure. Tick tick tick tick tick tick
 
tick. is that that narrative is
 
irresistible that one man can save the
 
world if he's lucky in time from
 
disaster. So it starts off with Pishim
 
and it goes on to um Noah and then it
 
goes on to Hollywood.
 
&gt;&gt; Do you think this arc
 
in the tablet actually was ever built?
 
You did build a replica one-third the
 
size.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; And you uh people should check out you
 
tell the story of that wonderfully. Now,
 
what did you learn from building this
 
replica? And do you think the actual ark
 
existed?
 
&gt;&gt; No, I don't think so. I think it's a
 
literary construction out of the reality
 
that people who did survive were on
 
boats. I mean, they had boats for sure,
 
and you might wake up in the Persian
 
Gulf and never know what happened, but
 
you know, it's a literary
 
moral principle teaching narrative. And
 
look, missionaries take it all around
 
the world. That's the other thing. See,
 
there this is this is the mystery of it
 
that you have flood stories everywhere.
 
And some of them are from medalsome
 
missionaries who have all these innocent
 
little kids sitting on benches and and
 
I'm going to tell you a story like that.
 
So it moves into this consciousness and
 
it gets recycled and it gets recycled.
 
So this is one thing and then also there
 
probably are spontaneous ideas because
 
it's not so complicated or so amazing
 
that independently people would have
 
such a narrative after all you know like
 
the the great river in China floods and
 
everybody gets so that it's not at all
 
surprising but what was so shocking for
 
George Smith who was such a clever
 
person is to read for the first time on
 
this tablet from Ninovi long before the
 
one that I discovered came to light
 
about the three birds being released one
 
after the other and that that was the
 
clincher that the two stories were
 
locked together and lots of clergymen
 
got very miserable about it and didn't
 
know what to make of it. So that's
 
that's a definitive proof that there's a
 
literary
 
&gt;&gt; literary I think literary link I think
 
so
 
&gt;&gt; and I mean these puzzles that are then
 
connected but the the ark you discover
 
a thousand years
 
so that means that story of the flood
 
has been told many many times across
 
that span to you know
 
&gt;&gt; yeah do your homework or the flood is
 
going to That's right.
 
&gt;&gt; To all the
 
&gt;&gt; That's right. And every time somebody
 
built a coracore and they didn't do the
 
waterproofing, right?
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; You know what will happen? It'll be out
 
on the river and that will be your lot.
 
You know, I I think so. I think it was a
 
I there there's a certain amount of
 
evidence that in Mesopotamian society,
 
people talk about the time before the
 
flood and after the flood. And it's like
 
when I was a boy, people used to talk
 
about before the war, we used to
 
and now we we do this that it's a kind
 
of cataclysmic cut across history which
 
provides a a ruler. So things are either
 
before it or after it because there's a
 
king list for example where they wrote
 
down the names of all the kings all the
 
way back to the beginning including
 
kings before the flood. They knew about
 
that. They have their names and their
 
great regal years or thousands of years.
 
Fascinating.
 
&gt;&gt; So there's a guy named Graham Hancock
 
who talks about the younger Jesus
 
hypothesis 10,000 BC that there was an
 
asteroid that hit Earth and melted the
 
ice sheets and that created a flood in
 
North America. So that means an actual
 
cataclysmic global event that then as
 
all the different civilizations sprung
 
up, they all carried that knowledge,
 
that memory. That's his idea. What
 
probability would you assign to that?
 
&gt;&gt; I would say negligible because I regard
 
it as a literary matter
 
&gt;&gt; which is not predicated on the existence
 
of flood in people's minds. But I do
 
believe that the story in Mesopotamia
 
owes its inception to a disastrous
 
flood. But nothing global, nothing that
 
touched America or China or Birmingham.
 
So I I I don't have any sympathy with
 
that. But people have made drilled a
 
cause and in I don't know all over. I
 
I'm not interested in all that stuff. is
 
to my mind. It's a literary topos of
 
great potency of irresistible potency
 
because everybody identifies with the
 
idea of being in bed and someone knocks
 
on the door says get up. You got to
 
build a boat and this is what you're
 
going to need and you got to get on with
 
it sunshine or we're all sunk. I mean
 
what are you going to do? The most
 
interesting thing is this Atraases in
 
the 1700 text, he wasn't a king and he
 
wasn't a sailor or a boat builder. So
 
how comes this clever god who wants to
 
find someone to build? Wouldn't you go
 
for a look in the yellow pages for a
 
boat building company and say, "Listen,
 
fellas, I got to deal with." No, he had
 
to tell him, "This is the blueprint.
 
This is the shape. You need all this.
 
You need all that. You got to measure it
 
and all that." It's a very interesting
 
thing. I mean, yeah, that's a great
 
story. You don't go to the great boat
 
boat builder. You go
 
&gt;&gt; the
 
&gt;&gt; taxi driver or something to
 
&gt;&gt; the taxi and then that's that that uh
 
hero's journey that that's the stuff of
 
great myths. Yeah,
 
&gt;&gt; it is. It is a great myth.
 
&gt;&gt; A little detail would be really cool
 
about the the the replica like uh what
 
did you of the boat? Yeah. One
 
&gt;&gt; something else.
 
There were there were three BS who did
 
it.
 
&gt;&gt; Yep. And they were specialists in
 
reconstructing medieval Arab boats
 
because quite often they found in the
 
mud or bits or they have information and
 
they rec so they were at home in it and
 
we built it on a small lagoon in in
 
Kerala. It was just the most
 
unbelievably wonderful thing because
 
they used the instructions as a
 
blueprint. They made it about a third of
 
the size of the original. A pretty huge
 
thing but they made it they because it
 
had wooden ribs. You see?
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
 
&gt;&gt; And they could get wood ribs. They
 
worked out by computer the maximum
 
maximum size they could do it when it
 
would work. Beyond it, it would be
 
impossible because once they built the
 
curved ribs and then the stuff woven all
 
around it, it had to be covered in
 
bitammen, which is also very heavy to
 
make it waterproof. So they calculated
 
the size and it worked. So they built
 
this thing on rollers and it was pushed
 
out into the it was just the most
 
unbeliev I went out there with my dear
 
wife for the last few days and was on
 
the maiden voyage and they had trouble
 
with the bumen because Indian bammen is
 
really not up to scratch and they
 
couldn't get Iraqi bitin because it's
 
cultural property it's carcinogenic they
 
wouldn't export a tank a load of Iraqi
 
so we had to use Indian stuff but the
 
thing is this the bitamin which they
 
coated it with was okay but it wasn't
 
perfect so when went out into the
 
waters. There was a bit of a leak. Water
 
had to be bailed out. So I was ah you
 
see
 
I said okay listen sunshine. I said to
 
this producer you ever been in a rowing
 
boat without water in the bottom? Excuse
 
me.
 
&gt;&gt; Oh you're saying that's that's a feature
 
not
 
&gt;&gt; that's the feature of the thing. Yeah
 
that's the feature. That thing could
 
have gone to ports.
 
&gt;&gt; So it's authentic.
 
&gt;&gt; Absolutely right. We had such an
 
adventure with that thing. They made a
 
documentary film. Yeah, in various
 
languages. And you know what they did?
 
You know, I was in it a bit a bit. And
 
they had people saying, "Oh, I don't
 
think it was this. I don't think it was
 
that." You know, they didn't let me go
 
back and say, "What the hell are you
 
talking about? I did it. I know what I'm
 
talking I can rec." They didn't they
 
didn't do it. I I couldn't get my own
 
back. I was really annoyed, really
 
furious.
 
&gt;&gt; So, you're you're saying that there's
 
some inaccurate things, too.
 
&gt;&gt; I am saying there's some inaccurate
 
things. Yeah. Somebody in Iraq said,
 
"Oh, it couldn't have been that. They
 
probably had lots of little coracles all
 
tied together, did they? Fuck. I mean,
 
you know, he couldn't read the stuff. I
 
mean, it's really, really, really
 
annoying. I mean, you should have a
 
chance, shouldn't you? You know, if
 
you're going to have a fencing match,
 
you both have to have a rap here,
 
wouldn't you say?
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And you're the the OG. You're the
 
person that coded it.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But the thing is this, the
 
proportions of the material were
 
accurate. M
 
&gt;&gt; this is the crucial thing that um what
 
had happened was is they took the
 
information about how you make a real
 
coral which is usually enough two people
 
and a few sheep and goats and they
 
bumped them up so that it worked. And I
 
know why that is
 
because it goes back to your question
 
about oral literature because there must
 
have been times when people went to
 
villages and told them about the flood
 
and when they got to the question of the
 
boat they'd say something like this and
 
Enki said you got to build the biggest
 
coracal you've ever seen like that right
 
well I mean if you do this in cinema in
 
Guilford people will say well that's
 
fine but if you do it to a whole load of
 
river people who use coracals and make
 
build. They're not going to take that.
 
They're not going to say, "How big was
 
it then? Come on, how big was it?" So,
 
what do they do? They go to a coral
 
place and they work out the proportions
 
of material and then they bump it up so
 
that the actor who reads this for the
 
first few times he has in his pocket how
 
much it is, but after a while he knows
 
it by heart. so that none of these
 
people get angry and you can't expect us
 
big enough for all this. So then he'd
 
have all the stuff and he'd do it with
 
this way and you need all this and need
 
all this and they'd all be hypnotized by
 
it. That I think is is actually
 
regarding your question, it's on the
 
cusp of purely oral literature to purely
 
literary literature. It's actually there
 
because you can see that it was molded
 
in the environment when people were
 
still talking.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. You got to make it authentic to
 
really connect with people.
 
&gt;&gt; Well, you couldn't pull it over their
 
eyes. I mean, you know,
 
&gt;&gt; I wish uh many of the films in Hollywood
 
today would have the same level of
 
rigor.
 
&gt;&gt; Rigor is one of the things lacking in
 
the world.
 
&gt;&gt; By the way, I forgot to ask. Why was the
 
flood myth focused on noisy people?
 
&gt;&gt; Well, it can't really be noisy. I tell
 
you what the explanation is. It's it's
 
something quite different. Before the
 
flood, the gods
 
had not created death.
 
So I think the noise was a reflex of the
 
fact there were just too many animals,
 
too many people, and they had to do
 
something about it. So it's a sort of
 
euphemism so to speak because after the
 
flood at the end of the tablet not my
 
tablet but the other ones where it's
 
still broken it says there's a
 
tantalizing thing where they create
 
baron women and who can't have children
 
and men who can't have children and
 
people who priestesses who don't have
 
children and they institute in society
 
some figures who will not reproduce the
 
species. So it's actually a rather
 
sophisticated
 
Malthusian kind of philosophical
 
position. It's remarkable. So that the
 
noise means there's so many of them, not
 
they're actually so noisy that we can't
 
hear ourselves think.
 
&gt;&gt; You have to tell me about the
 
the world of ancient games. Maybe we can
 
start with the ancient royal game of
 
what is it and uh how were you somehow
 
able to crack the rules of it? Well, the
 
Royal Game of U um is a board of 20
 
squares in a rather idiosyncratic form
 
and it was pretty much unknown until the
 
1920s when Selenid Woolly was digging at
 
the site of or
 
in the graves of the royal family, the
 
Sumerian rulers, they found four or five
 
boards of this pattern together with
 
dice and pieces which showed that it was
 
popular among them at this time and also
 
that wherever they were going in the
 
world to come they would want to be
 
playing it. And so that was one thing
 
and we had the number of pieces and some
 
dice. So uh lots of people had ideas
 
about how it might have been played and
 
that went on like that for a very long
 
time and thereafter boards for this game
 
turned up in most of the countries of
 
the Middle East sometimes quite a lot of
 
them and and the one from Ur dates to
 
about 2,600 BC
 
and from then down to the end of the
 
first millennium there's examples of
 
boards from Mespert
 
itself and from Egypt,
 
Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, Greece,
 
um, Cree
 
all over the place. And when you put all
 
the boards together,
 
you realize that you're dealing with a
 
board game which was um, extremely
 
widespread and extremely popular
 
&gt;&gt; across space and time.
 
&gt;&gt; Across space and time. So it lasted for
 
nearly 3,000 years and it was played all
 
over the place. So it's one of those
 
games which is like
 
chess or back gammon which you can say
 
are world conquerors because the way I
 
see that the issue is that human beings
 
um for a very long time have been shall
 
we say hungry for
 
things to do because all through the
 
Bronze Age and the Iron Age There was no
 
television,
 
you know, there weren't there weren't no
 
nothing. And kids played with pullalong
 
things and adults um had board games and
 
they're kind of embedded in culture from
 
a very early time. And this game was so
 
widespread, you know, Tuton Camun, for
 
example, in his tomb, there were two or
 
three boards for it with the pieces. So
 
it arrived in the middle of the second
 
millennium in Egypt and even the pharaoh
 
played it. So you have a game which the
 
interesting point about it is that it
 
spread
 
um across the gnome world um without
 
written rules and without people
 
necessarily knowing the same language.
 
Um, so a merchant would go
 
end up in a bar, you know, come from
 
India or I don't know where and start pl
 
seeing these guys playing have a go
 
himself and it looks rather interesting.
 
You go home and try and remember what it
 
looked like and try and work out how to,
 
you know, be transported this way and
 
the other. And so you can see that that
 
the board has 20 squares. So you have a
 
block of 4x3 and then a bridge of two
 
and then a second 3x two thing at the
 
end. So it it's difficult to describe
 
the actual shape. But what happened was
 
after about 2,000 BC the squares at the
 
far end which there were two on one
 
flank and two on the other were all put
 
at the end of the central avenue.
 
&gt;&gt; So you end up with 12 squares down the
 
middle. So all the boards after the
 
period of ore have 12 squares down the
 
middle and then four on each side at one
 
end. So it meant then that when you play
 
the game you have dice to move the
 
pieces. You have pieces all the same and
 
you obviously put them on your first
 
corner and you turn the corner you go up
 
the middle and off the end. And it was a
 
race game of the kind that everybody
 
knows from their own childhood. And some
 
squares which had rosettes on were the
 
safe squares or you had another throw
 
and you could maybe put two on one
 
square. We don't know. You could try and
 
block people and but anyway the crucial
 
thing is that the widespread
 
distribution of this idiosyncratic shape
 
and its lasting thing shows it must have
 
been a very good game. Um if if people
 
more or less played the same thing on it
 
everywhere. I mean it may be that they
 
were completely different games but
 
probably not. So this is the thing it
 
makes you wonder what would be about it
 
that would fit so well with a wide
 
appetite from different persons
 
different types of person. And the thing
 
is that although it's a race game where
 
you're at the mercy of dice
 
and lucky squares and unlucky squares
 
that the process of getting your pieces
 
on and off the board as a winner is
 
primarily fortuitous
 
but it has built within it is the way I
 
understand the game plays a a measurable
 
quot of strategy. It's a mix of
 
probability and strategy.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So most games are either just um
 
probability like snakes and ladders.
 
Snake shoots and ladders is just thing
 
like that. Or you have a game like chess
 
which is pure strategy.
 
And the grown-up game in the modern
 
world where fortuitity or chance and
 
strategy have a good balance is back
 
gammon which is a sort of grownup
 
version of this sort of game where
 
nevertheless if you play according to
 
the most rational interpretation it
 
strategy is a a major factor. So what
 
happened was that many people had ideas
 
how it was played and the route followed
 
and I did too. And then I discovered
 
this tablet in the British Museum which
 
was written at a very late period in the
 
2nd century BC. So 2,300 years after
 
this object existed and it had on it the
 
names of the pieces and what the pieces
 
were like and various things about the
 
throws. And it was obvious that it was
 
the rules were to do with a game which
 
was derived from this simple early game
 
and that working backwards from it, you
 
could reconstruct the game in accordance
 
with its later incarnation that might be
 
workable. And it jolly well turned out
 
to be workable because people play this
 
all over the world now. And they um they
 
even play in Iraq in cafes. way. Now,
 
now
 
&gt;&gt; they do because after it's come come
 
back to life, it's on the internet,
 
people play, they're different rules,
 
but the ones that I invented are pretty
 
much regular. So, if you have a good
 
balance between chance and strategy
 
&gt;&gt; and it's a fair game and doesn't take
 
four days to play like modern board
 
games. So, you can have a go and if
 
you're lucky, you win fast and then you
 
have another go, maybe best of three or
 
something like that. It works out rather
 
well. And once I was in um uh in in
 
California in in in in the Getty and I
 
had to give a talk about this with all
 
the information and there's lots of
 
things to say about it and the the the
 
lady who ran the friends of the Getty
 
had a brilliant idea. So she bought in
 
20 or so commercial copies of this game
 
and they had small tables with chairs
 
and after the lecture I was supposed to
 
say to everybody, okay, this is what you
 
have to do. this is how you play cuz you
 
can get the rules down in like 3 minutes
 
like this. So I said okay first you have
 
to do this first you have to do that. So
 
off you go. So there was silence and
 
then after a while someone said I hate
 
you. I'm never playing with you again.
 
when they never played it before,
 
&gt;&gt; when somebody had escaped at the last
 
minute, cleaned up just when they
 
thought they were going to get and it
 
provokes that solitary, benevolent fury
 
and rage in the players
 
&gt;&gt; which all good board games do. And they
 
were happily married couples who were at
 
the end of the afternoon phoning their
 
respective lawyers to discuss the
 
future. That kind of thing, beautiful
 
matter. You think games are,
 
you know, our desire to play games, a
 
mix of chance, a mix of strategy is a
 
part of human nature. You think that's
 
always been there?
 
&gt;&gt; I do. I do. Yes. I think um
 
I mean you can you can say that um in
 
communities you have rivalry, hostility,
 
and who's the best, who's the fastest,
 
who's the strongest and things. And if
 
you play a board game like that, all the
 
reality of it is sublimated into a safe
 
terrain. Yes.
 
&gt;&gt; Where you can nevertheless get angry.
 
But it's not
 
&gt;&gt; it's not like that. That's one thing.
 
But more significantly, I believe is is
 
the question of what in India people
 
call time pass.
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
 
&gt;&gt; Which is not quite the same as pastime.
 
Time pass is the question of what you do
 
when it's too hot to do anything.
 
which is true a good part of the day and
 
a good part of the year and grandmothers
 
sit under trees with their grandchildren
 
and they tell stories and they do this
 
and they do that and time pass is a very
 
useful
 
catchall phrase for the existence of
 
board games and in India there are many
 
board games um chess of course is the
 
famous one but they're quite lot of
 
three in a row type games or fox against
 
geese games and wolves against sheep and
 
all those sorts of things which come out
 
of the landscape in miniature and were
 
play for pleasure and also
 
uh in a kind of way it doesn't really
 
matter who wins because you might play
 
goes round and round and round
 
eventually somebody wins and then they
 
have another game. So it's a sort of
 
that kind of rather graceful valid
 
function for not wasting time doing
 
something which is stimulating and
 
beneficial without it being um
 
overpowering in either way. So I think
 
it is a human matter. Of course uh we
 
humans also sometimes mix in gambling
 
into the whole thing to add some money
 
on top of it which I'm sure sometimes
 
was involved here. I think I think so
 
but probably only late on because money
 
as such
 
&gt;&gt; of course doesn't appear till quite late
 
but there there are uh
 
we know in Mesopotamia it's rather
 
interesting thing there's a school
 
tablet with three or four lines quoted
 
from one literary thing and three or
 
four from another literary thing and one
 
of them it has this
 
uh oh my Astro Al. Oh my Astragal. Woe
 
is me. Woe is me.
 
And that's all we have. And I think this
 
is an example of a genre of literature
 
called the gamblers's lament
 
because they use knucklebones or
 
astrogals as dice. And I'm sure there
 
were people who bet sack of this or a
 
room full of that and uh on the throw of
 
the knucklebones. And this extract in
 
the school text is probably from a
 
literary tablet in which somebody
 
lost everything
 
even though they weren't coins because I
 
think you're right that it's a natural
 
it's a natural thing to for it to acrue
 
and also maybe men and women play
 
differently because there are some games
 
which were played um in karims among
 
girls you know on a hot afternoon where
 
nobody was going to win anything. But
 
the rules tablet which gives this kind
 
of backhanded information about it is
 
couched in such a way that it talks
 
about people in a bar
 
because the movement of the pieces is
 
calculated in terms of
 
food and drink and women what you win.
 
So the landscape in which the rules
 
accounts for credibility are for is just
 
exactly that setup.
 
As you mentioned, you're
 
the creator at the uh possibly the
 
greatest place on earth, the British
 
Museum.
 
&gt;&gt; Oh yes.
 
&gt;&gt; Can you tell me what are some of the
 
incredible magical aspects of the
 
British Museum? Well, the British Museum
 
is a magical place and um it's a special
 
case um because there's a lot of flurry
 
and dispute now about what museums are
 
and what they're for and why they exist
 
and whether they should ever have
 
existed and all these sorts of issues
 
which people go on about. But the
 
British Museum is unlike almost all
 
museums in the world because it's to do
 
with the achievements of mankind from
 
the beginning onwards. So it's a kind of
 
celebration of art and more. But it's
 
not an art museum. It's to do with the
 
struggle of the human race against all
 
the things that beset it and how it has
 
triumphed and how marvelous it is and
 
the things that have happened and not
 
turning a blind eye to all the
 
contrasting horrible things that have
 
happened but it's the narrative of the
 
human race as I see it as discernable in
 
objects. So it means that we serve two
 
very important
 
horizons.
 
One is that we represent as far as we
 
can the whole world with no injudicious
 
attention paid to any one or other
 
culture that they're all to us
 
one. So there's no favoring
 
any religious group, any country group,
 
anything of the kind. It's the human
 
species we try to tell the narrative of
 
in its own right and how it overlaps
 
with
 
its neighbors and how it what it's
 
learned from what came before. All those
 
features together is really what the
 
concern of the museum is. And of course
 
to to collect everything we we or has
 
been to collect everything we can to
 
tell those narratives and also to look
 
after them um according to scientific
 
principle. So all those things at once
 
are the task of the British Museum. And
 
the second horizon it serves um is the
 
unborn.
 
So ba babies yet to be born and their
 
children and their children and their
 
children. And it seems to me that the
 
task of the museum is of such cultural
 
significance and such so to speak sacred
 
validity that it shouldn't have to put
 
up with people carping about this or
 
that or saying the museums are sinful
 
and wicked and should be demolished
 
because the people who say these things
 
don't really have any idea of actually
 
what it really does stand for. And it's
 
a kind of lighthouse
 
in a universe where we are surrounded by
 
darkness, ignorance, stupidity,
 
uninterest, disinterest, skepticism,
 
ignorance, and so forth about the very
 
issues that we're interested in. And
 
it's one of the places in the world
 
where you can talk about truth and
 
beauty and elegance and intelligence
 
without it being an affront to people
 
who have none of those qualities and
 
without it being a kind of speech that
 
people shudder or they think you're
 
being naive about it because those are
 
the crucial things. And also
 
about religion that we don't favor a
 
religion and we don't sponsor a
 
religion. We try to look them for what
 
they are and to assess their
 
relationships and what they offer
 
perhaps less with a less assertity and
 
less criticism than I would if I was the
 
director. I would try to put them down
 
the wrong end of a microscope and look
 
at them for what they are and what they
 
have done and what's been done in the
 
names of religion. You probably would
 
never get away with that. But maybe one
 
day that will be an important part
 
because it's a major contributive factor
 
to what's happened to the human race
 
which is never really articulated
 
sharply about what religion has done to
 
us and where we might have been without
 
it. Because not having religion does not
 
mean not having law or morality or
 
sensitivity or consideration or love or
 
any of those things. None of those
 
things depends on religion.
 
And those are the things which are
 
important. So I think it's um people say
 
ah you say this because you work there
 
and you you know you're a curator. You
 
would say that that the British Museum
 
is a special place has nothing to do
 
with that. It is actually a special
 
place because you cannot point to
 
another museum in the world with the
 
same task. For example, the Louvre is
 
basically a museum of art. Basically a
 
museum of art, not a museum of ideas.
 
And the Met is definitely a museum of
 
art. It's called the Museum of Art. And
 
that's their priority. Design and color
 
and shape to us to my mind is the
 
British Museum. This is one factor among
 
many others. And we are not an art
 
museum and we're not a local museum.
 
We're not a museum of the history of the
 
bicycle. We're not a celebration of
 
evil. We are, as it were, doing, as I
 
see it, the best we could do. If, for
 
example, a whole load of Martians
 
arrived in the great court and um burst
 
through the front door and said to us,
 
um, "Tell us all about this place. Tell
 
us about the world. Can you do it fast
 
cuz we got to leave." And if you took
 
them round and said, "Look at this. Look
 
at this. Look at this. Look at this."
 
They'd get some picture which wasn't
 
insane. The only thing they wouldn't get
 
is a recording of Johnny be good by
 
Chuck Bry, but apparently one's being
 
put into space.
 
&gt;&gt; So this is a very comforting thing.
 
&gt;&gt; But that's kind of what the task for the
 
British Museum is to do that but for the
 
entirety of human history.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; Store of artifacts that
 
&gt;&gt; that are the raindrops from which you
 
can reconstruct the world.
 
&gt;&gt; Precisely. So, and it's not a valid
 
criticism to say to us that most of the
 
stuff is not on exhibition, which is
 
what everybody says. It should go here,
 
it should go there because it's not on
 
exhibition. But we're not doing it for
 
any other reason than stockpiling for
 
future examination. See this is the
 
important perspective that nobody
 
considers because the thing is when you
 
have something which is contemporary
 
if you're a clever journalist or a
 
clever thinker you can write essays
 
about it you can talk about it and you
 
can see it but you can only see it from
 
the perspective from which you operate.
 
And with the passage of time the
 
significance of objects what they stand
 
for what they meant and what they can
 
still mean shifts. And the further back
 
you go, the sharper you can understand
 
things, especially in terms of their own
 
precedent and their own modern par
 
contemporary parallels. So the the dis
 
the benefit of distance storage and
 
contemplation is inestimable.
 
There's so many questions I want to ask
 
you. What what wisdom do you think
 
the people from whom these artifacts
 
came had that we may have the modern day
 
humans may have lost or lost in part or
 
in whole. So the it's often as you've
 
spoken about we see the ancient peoples
 
as uh lesser, dumber,
 
um more primitive and you've spoken
 
about how they are basically the same.
 
&gt;&gt; I think you put them on a bus all
 
wearing the same clothes, you wouldn't
 
know. That's my feeling. But there is
 
some I'm sure there's some greater
 
wisdom they had about certain things as
 
as we have greater wisdom about others.
 
Thanks to Einstein, we figured out the
 
curvature of spaceime
 
&gt;&gt; which they didn't know about. But
 
&gt;&gt; they knew quite a lot about astronomy
 
though. Quite a lot about astronomy.
 
&gt;&gt; They stared at the stars.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And they measured them and they
 
they they made calculations. And when
 
the Greeks went to Babylon, they think,
 
"Hey, man, this is really cool." And
 
they
 
wrote it all down and went home. Yeah,
 
definitely. Definitely. Well, I think
 
it's it's it's a hard question to
 
answer. Um but one of the things is that
 
they were spared
 
things which have cluttered up the
 
essence of humanity because I think that
 
the modern adherence to the electronic
 
universe is disastrous for humans and
 
because it reduces the vitality of the
 
human component. I think it's
 
restrictive in a way that people don't
 
realize until it's too late. Like drugs,
 
if you take drugs now and again, you
 
think, "Oh, it's fine. It's fine." Then
 
suddenly you realize you're addicted to
 
heroin. It's a bit like that. People use
 
the electronic world like an an
 
addictive drug and they can't get
 
through without it. And I think this is
 
a very recent thing, but I suppose it's
 
not I'm a lite and say we shouldn't have
 
railway engines and we shouldn't have
 
kettles, but I think one one of the
 
things about the the ancient world was
 
that people never went anywhere unless
 
they were merchants or in soldiers. They
 
never went anywhere. Probably people
 
born and died in a village and then
 
their children born and died in the
 
village and they never knew anything
 
about the outside world. maybe very
 
little sometimes there'd be a message
 
but in principle they had no idea about
 
other countries other languages or how
 
big they were or so I don't think they
 
had wisdom in in in a way that you could
 
type out following precepts will make
 
life better
 
because they told lies and they esteem
 
the truth and they fell in love and they
 
committed adultery and they did murder
 
and they did all the
 
I think in a way the ancient world
 
allowed human beings to be to behave
 
more naturally than it does now.
 
The world in which we live. I mean if
 
you do live in in a rustic environment
 
or or or by the sea or or or you're a
 
fisherman or you I mean all those normal
 
real kind of things then it's probably
 
all right. But most people who live
 
crammed in the cities live a very very
 
artificial life where the principles
 
which they regard as ineluctibly crucial
 
are not ineluctibly crucial. They're not
 
in you know one example is this ghastly
 
thing on mobiles where you get a short
 
clip from a real program.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; I think it's utterly utterly wicked. So
 
you have children all over the world who
 
cannot articulate, spell or make meaning
 
clear using the best most literary and
 
most beneficial language has ever been
 
created which is English to save their
 
lives. And they use a word I'll give you
 
an example.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; Right. Like I went
 
&gt;&gt; like I went
 
&gt;&gt; like I went. Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; So it's difficult to define that
 
grammatically. difficult like I should
 
have gone where I went or I should have
 
gone means to speak.
 
Now how would it be if when we see the
 
verb to go in Sumerian it actually meant
 
to speak. How where would we be? Where
 
would we be?
 
&gt;&gt; I mean we should probably say that even
 
in in that time there was probably
 
slang, right? It just wouldn't end up
 
written
 
&gt;&gt; in the dialects. There were words that
 
sailors used for sure. all those things,
 
&gt;&gt; but they wouldn't end up in writing.
 
&gt;&gt; Sometimes they do.
 
&gt;&gt; We have to remember that Cambridge and
 
Oxford speak in a certain way that's
 
proper and formal and very smart, but
 
there's most of the people in bars,
 
sailors have a different way of
 
speaking. So they would probably say
 
like I went and have emojis and
 
&gt;&gt; but the thing is you have to moderate
 
your vocabulary
 
&gt;&gt; to talk to people of a certain age
 
because they don't know what the fuck
 
you're talking about if you use language
 
exactly. And the thing which is so
 
exquisite about English is like with a
 
barristister you can make a case which
 
is absolutely wonderful because it says
 
exactly what it means and there's no
 
wrigle room and that the conversation
 
should be like that with no wiggle room.
 
It's not it's not just a matter of
 
spelling but the basic vocabulary you
 
know something very interesting people
 
say they know English or they speak
 
English. Have you ever in your life
 
opened a full-size volume of the Oxford
 
English Dictionary? It's about that like
 
this fat. I have a whole set. I love
 
them. So, this is it. You take a volume
 
off the shelf and you open the book and
 
you run your forefinger down the various
 
columns of writing. You might have to
 
turn several pages before you find a
 
single word you've ever heard before
 
because English is unimaginably rich. I
 
grew up in a house where everybody read
 
literature all the time. I had three
 
sisters and and then a brother and we
 
all read literature. Went to the library
 
every week, read lots and lots and lots
 
of books. So, we all had really good
 
vocabulary.
 
And
 
that's how you get vocabulary.
 
Otherwise, you don't because in
 
conversation, do you want more tea? All
 
this sort of stuff. You don't learn new
 
vocabulary. You have to get it from
 
reading and listening to proper stuff.
 
&gt;&gt; We should say the very important aspect
 
of vocabulary. Why it's important to
 
know a lot of words and to uh speak
 
clearly because those words also define
 
the quality of your thoughts.
 
&gt;&gt; Sure.
 
&gt;&gt; At the end of the day,
 
&gt;&gt; that's exactly right. I must say I I I
 
think it is a pity if having produced
 
such wonderful languages in the world
 
that they don't that their use is so
 
inhibited. I I think the right way to
 
think about it is the way the British
 
Museum thinks about it. So you're
 
commenting on the ephemeral on the on
 
the thing that is in the moment right
 
now is happening. The reality is only a
 
few select things will last 100 200
 
years from now about this moment in
 
time. And so
 
we have to sort of think
 
um with the big picture perspective and
 
the slowness of time. Yes, in the moment
 
there's these catastrophes. There's
 
changing ways of speaking, the
 
technology
 
tearing apart the fabric of society. But
 
when you zoom out, you will think about
 
the grand ideas of Einstein,
 
the battle of ideologies with communism
 
and Nazism of the 20th centuries, the
 
bad, the triumphant,
 
the rockets, these humans started
 
launching rockets going to the moon,
 
maybe to Mars, those those things. And
 
we won't be thinking about emojis and
 
any of that. And and in some sense
 
that's the the stuff you're looking at
 
with with kunea forms is the
 
the things that stand the test of time
 
that are there.
 
&gt;&gt; That's true. But I think I think that
 
language properly used is a crucial
 
human tool for communication.
 
&gt;&gt; Absolutely. Yes. Speaking of which, I
 
have to ask some more about the kaiform
 
tablets at the British Museum. When
 
you're surrounded by so many and by the
 
way, how many uh ka forms?
 
&gt;&gt; About 130,000.
 
&gt;&gt; That is so cool.
 
&gt;&gt; Jeez, it's pretty cool.
 
&gt;&gt; What are some of the most beautiful to
 
you? Maybe ones we don't know about ka
 
forms like they make you smile.
 
&gt;&gt; Well, there not many jokes. You asked
 
about jokes.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah, they lost their sense of humor in
 
Canaan form.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I think there are. There's one
 
that what I can remember was the
 
um a fly or what mosquito lands on the
 
back of an elephant and says am I too
 
heavy for you or something like that
 
joke.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; You wouldn't mute it in the pub or
 
anything like that.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You had to be there.
 
&gt;&gt; And also do you like Tom Lara?
 
&gt;&gt; Of course.
 
&gt;&gt; Okay. That's good. That's good.
 
I once went to America on a lecture tour
 
and I ended up in a town where
 
Dr. Vienna Fon Brown
 
&gt;&gt; um ended up running the American rocket
 
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
 
&gt;&gt; industry.
 
&gt;&gt; It doesn't matter
 
&gt;&gt; once the rockets are up who cares where
 
they come down. That's not my department
 
says Wner Brown. that guy. I mean, I I
 
could tell where your wit comes from.
 
The fact that you know Tom Lair,
 
&gt;&gt; but he's such a The way he plays the
 
piano is fantastic.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; I think my dad recorded them off the
 
radio on a realtore tape recorder and I
 
learned them all by heart. They were so
 
fantastic. But I I knew a Harvard
 
professor who I stayed with once who was
 
a sumerologist and his wife said that
 
she knew Tom Ner when he was in the math
 
department
 
&gt;&gt; and they used to have parties and he
 
always played the piano in the corner of
 
the room. He's just amazing.
 
Yeah, the I mean he had a real you have
 
that you know I've watched a lot of your
 
stuff your whole way of being the wit.
 
There's something about that like
 
biting wit. It's a bit of humor bit of
 
sadness in it. It just kind of feels
 
like it really quickly gets to the
 
complexity of what it means to be human.
 
&gt;&gt; I think so. But the the the paradoxical
 
thing about Tom Larry is when he's
 
talking about um
 
the bomb and and all that and devices
 
and
 
international trouble. It's so
 
unchanged.
 
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
 
&gt;&gt; And and same with Doctor Strange Love.
 
It's just it's very remarkable. Anyway,
 
next time you're here, when you're here,
 
you should come and see me in the museum
 
and I'll show you some of these
 
confounded things for yourself and um
 
show you the Chicago dictionary and give
 
you a grammar book to learn. And
 
&gt;&gt; Irving, you're a remarkable human being.
 
&gt;&gt; Well, I'm very glad we met.
 
&gt;&gt; It's truly an honor to meet you.
 
&gt;&gt; Me, too. It's been very interesting.
 
&gt;&gt; Irving, thank you so much for talking.
 
&gt;&gt; It's been a big pleasure for me, Lex. Be
 
well.
 
&gt;&gt; Thanks for listening to this
 
conversation with Irving Finkele. To
 
support this podcast, please check out
 
our sponsors in the description where
 
you can also find links to contact me,
 
ask questions, give feedback, and so on.
 
And now, let me leave you with some
 
words from Ludwick Woodenstein.
 
The limits of my language means the
 
limits of my world.
 
Thank you for listening. I hope to see
 
you next time.
